 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS
OF THE

ABSENTEE-SHAWNEE TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED DECEMBER 5, 1938 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON: 1939 
 

 
CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE ABSENTEE- 
SHAWNEE TRIBE OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of 
Oklahoma, in order to promote our common welfare and to secure 
to ourselves and our descendants, the rights, powers and privileges 
offered by the Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act, 
approved June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967) do establish this organization 
and adopt the following Constitution and By-laws pursuant to that 
Act.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be known as the Absentee- 

Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma.

Article II—Membership of Tribe

Section 1. The membership of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of 

Indians of Oklahoma shall consist of the following persons:

(a) All persons of Indian blood enrolled on the official census roll 

of the Tribe as of January 1, 1937.

(b) All children born to any member of the Tribe after January 

1, 1937 who are of Absentee-Shawnee Indian blood.

Sec. 2. The Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regula
tions, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, cov
ering future membership including adoptions and the loss of 
membership.

Article III—Membership of Council

The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be the Absentee- 
Shawnee Council. The membership of the Council shall be all the 
members of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe, both males and females 21 
years of age and older.

Article IV—Officers

Section 1. The officers of this Tribe shall be the Chairman, Vice- 
Chairman, Secretary-Treasurer and two Councilmen elected by the 
membership of the Council. The term of office shall be for two years: 
Provided, That the present officers shall serve until their successors 
are elected and installed.

Article V—Committees

Section 1. There shall be a Business Committee which shall con
sist of the officers and councilmen as provided in Article IV. This

Committee shall have the power to appoint subordinate committees 
and representatives, to transact business and otherwise speak or act 
on behalf of the Tribe in all matters on which the Tribe is empowered 
to act. The powers of the Tribe shall be set forth in detail in the 
coimorate charter to be requested by the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Grievance Committee.—This Committee shall consist of 
three members who shall be elected by the membershir) of the Council 
and shall not include any members of the Business Committee. The 
term of office shall be for two years.

Article VI—Elections

The first regular election of officers and members of the Grievance 
Committee shall be held within 30 days after the adoption of this 
Constitution and By-laws, and, thereafter, regular elections will be 
held on the third Monday in June of each second year under rules 
and regulations prescribed by the Business Committee.

Article VII—Vacancies

Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled for an unexpired 

term by appointment of the Business Committee.

Article VIII—Removal of Officers

The Grievance Committee shall investigate complaints of miscon
duct in office of members of the Business Committee and upon a 
proper showing shall call a special meeting of the Council to act 
upon such complaints. The Council shall have power, by a majority 
vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him from office.

Article IX—Bill of Rights

Section 1. All members of the Tribe shall enjoy without hin
drance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and 
association. 

Sec. 2. This Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge, or 
otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of this 
Tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or of the United States.
Sec. 3. The individual vested property rights of any member of 
the Tribe shall not be altered, abridged, or otherwise affected by the 
provisions of this Constitution and By-laws without the consent of 
such individual member.

'

Sec. 4. Nothing contained in this Constitution shall be construed 
as a surrender by the Tribe of existing aide and services extended by 
the United States or the State of Oklahoma to the Tribe, such as 
health service, education, extension service, etc.

Article X—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and the attached By-laws may 
be proposed by a majority vote of the Business Committee or by a 
petition signed by 30 per cent of the adult members of the Tribe, and

if approved by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to 
a referendum vote of the adult members of the Tribe, and shall be 
effective if approved by a majority vote.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE ABSENTEE-SHAWNEE TRIBE OF INDIANS OF 
OKLAHOMA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the 
Council and of the Business Committee. He shall have general 
supervision of the affairs of the Council and of the Business Com
mittee and shall perform all duties appertaining to the office of 
Chairman.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman, in the absence of the Chairman, or 
during procedure to remove him shall perform the duties of that 
office.

Sec. 3. The Secretary-Treasurer shall correctly record the proceed
ings of all meetings. He shall make out the order of the business 
for the Chairman, shall notify all committees of their appointments, 
shall have custody of the records and all papers of the Council, 
which records and papers shall be open to inspection at any time, in 
his presence, by any member of the Council desiring to read them. 
He shall keep a correct list of all members of the Council, shall 
authenticate all accounts or orders of the Council and, in the absence 
of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, shall call the meeting to order 
until a Chairman pro tem is selected. He shall render a written 
report at the annual meeting and at the expiration of his term of 
office the records and all papers in his possession shall be turned over 
to his successor. He shall issue notices of all meetings and conduct 
all general correspondence, as directed by the Council or the Business 
Committee. He shall receive all moneys of the Council and keep 
an accurate account of receipts and disbursements.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep all tribal moneys entrusted to 
his care in a special account and all disbursements therefrom should 
be made by check. At any time that such account shall amount to 
more than $50 he shall file a bond satisfactory to the Business Com
mittee and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost of such 
bond shall be paid out of tribal moneys.

Article II—Qualification of Officers

Any person elected to membership on the Business Committee 
shall be not less than 21 years of age and a member of the Absentee- 
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma. At the time of his elec
tion, he shall be an actual resident of the Shawnee Indian Agency 
jurisdiction. Any person holding an elective office removing from 
the said jurisdiction shall automatically lose office.

Article III—Meetings

Section 1. Annual meetings of the Council shall be held on the 
third Monday in June of each year for the purpose of receiving 

reports and transacting any other business which may come regularly 
before the Council.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Council may be called at the dis
cretion of the Chairman, and shall be called by him upon the written 
request of a majority of the Business Committee or upon the written 
request of 50 members of the Tribe : Provided, That at least ten days' 
notice shall be given in each instance.

Sec. 3. The principal object of a special Council meeting must be 
stated in the call for same and may include the words ‘‘and for the 
transaction of other business that may be presented.” Unless these 
words are added no other business may be transacted except for the 
object stated in the call.

Sec. 4. Unless otherwise provided by resolution, the regular meet
ings of the Business Committee shall be held on the third Monday in 
September, December, March, and June of each year.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
by the Chairman at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon 
the written request of three members of the Business Committee.

Sec. 6. Unless some other point under the Shawnee Agency juris
diction is designated in the call or notice, all meetings of the Council 
and of the Business Committee shall be held at the Shawnee Indian 
Agency.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Forty members of the Council shall constitute a quorum 

to transact business at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Three members of the Business Committee shall constitute 

a quorum to transact business at any meeting.

Article V—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority of the 
Indians of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma voting at an 
election called by the Secretary of the Interior under the regulations 
which he may prescribe pursuant to section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian 
Welfare Act of June 26. 1936, provided, that at least 20 per cent of 
the eligible voters vote in said election.

I. Harry Slattery, the Acting Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe 
of Indians of Oklahoma.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws

Approval recommended October 5, 1938.

F. H. Daiker.

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Acting Secretary of the Interior.

Harry Slattery, 

Washington, D. C., October 18, 1938. 

[seal]
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 18. 1938 by the Acting 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws 
was submitted for ratification to the members of the Absentee- 
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma and was on December 5, 1938 
duly approved by a vote of 121 for, and 50 against, in an election 
in which over 20 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, 
pursuant to section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 
26,1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

Thomas B. Hood,

Chairman, Business Committee.
Thomas W. Alford, Jr., 
Secretary, Business Committee.

A. C. Hector,

Superintendent, Shawnee Indian Agency.

