DATE DOWNLOADED: Wed Jun 8 16:07:37 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitutions and Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, with 
Amendments (1988).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitutions & Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, with 
Amendments (1988).

APA 7th ed.
(1988). Constitutions and Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of
Oklahoma, with Amendments. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitutions and Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, with 
Amendments. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitutions & Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, with
Amendments (S.I.: s.n., 1988)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitutions and Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, with
Amendments (s.n., 1988

MLA 9th ed.
Constitutions and Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, with 
Amendments. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitutions and Bylaws of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, with
Amendments. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at 
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 WASHINGTON, D. C. 20245

REPLY REFER TO:

Tribal Government Services 

FEB 4 1977

Through: Anadarko Area Director, Anadarko, Oklahoma 73005

Mr. John E. Taylor

Superintendent, Shawnee Agency

Dear Mr, Taylor:

An October 4, 1976, memorandum from the Acting Anadarko Area 
Director transmitted for our approval a proposed constitutional revision 
for the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe. Further, it requested authorization 
to call a Secretarial election on such proposal. The effort to request 
the election was initiated by Absentee-Shawnee Business Committee 
Resolution No. AS-77-8 dated August 18, 1976.

Following our initial review of the proposed constitutional revision, 
a tribal delegation consisting of Mr. Danny Little Axe, Mr. Gary Davis, 
and Mr. John Sloat, met in this office during October of 1976 with 
our Tribal Relations Branch. During those discussions the delegates 
proposed several new concepts and asked that they be incorporated in 
the constitutional revision. This resulted in almost a complete 
redrafting in that so many Articles were affected by the new concepts. 
Included among the significant changes are the following: a degree 
of separation of governing powers, the creation of a tribal court system 
to handle functions previously executed by the Grievance Committee, 
 the establishment of an independent Election Commission, and the use 
of new terms to describe the various tribal elective bodies and their 
members. A further request by the delegates involves the conduct 
of the first election of tribal officials by the Bureau. Each of these 
were included in a further draft. Copies were informally provided to 
the Drafting Committee, your office and the Area Director.

Following consideration by a joint meeting of the Business Committee and 
the Drafting Committee, we were provided their further modifications. 
Such changes were discussed during a December 22, 1976, telephone 
conversation with Business Committee Chairman Danny Little Axe 
and minor adjustments resulted. The enclosed version of the proposed 
constitutional revision reflects the above.

The proposed revision of the Constitution and Bylaws of the Absentee-
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma is hereby approved, provided 
the Tribal Business Committee agrees with the changes which have been
incorporated into the enclosed version. Should there be any problems
we are certain they can be resolved.

If the Business Committee agrees with the modified proposal and provides 
you with an appropriate resolution to that effect, you are authorized to 
call an election of the adult members of the tribe in accordance with 
Article X of the present tribal constitution. The election shall be 
conducted under the enclosed Rules and Regulations, except where 
modified in the existing constitution and bylaws as to voting districts, 
eligibility of voters, and the manner of holding elections. Further, the 
requirement that absentee ballots be notarized is hereby waived, and 
in lieu, thereof, those procedures provided for in the enclosed 
January 31, 1957, letter shall be followed. Since the election is to 
be conducted pursuant to Federal Regulations, those persons who will 
be at least eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the election must 
be accorded the right to vote.

The date of the election shall be set by you in cooperation with the 
Business Committee and shall be not less than twenty (20) days nor 
more than sixty (60) days from the date of posting notices of the election.

Section 5 of the regulations provide for an Election Board composed of 
you as Chairman and representatives of the tribe. The Election Board 
shall furnish suitable ballots and supervise the conduct of the election.

The election results should be sent to us by telegram as soon as they 
become known. If ratified, the original of the proposed constitutional 
revision and the original of the completed Certificate of Results of 
Election should be copied and returned to the tribe. A copy 
Of the constitution ratified by the voters and a copy of the Certificate of 
Results of Election should be forwarded immediately to this office.

Nothing in our approval of this constitution shall be construed as 
authorizing any action that would be contrary to Federal law.

Sincerely yours,
 
  
 

(SGD)
 
 Commissioner of Indian Affairs
Deputy 

Enclosures 
 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 

ABSENTEE-SHAWNEE TRIBE OF INDIANS 

OF 
OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the people of the Big Jim and White Turkey Bands of the Shawnee 
Nation of American Indians initially organized pursuant to a constitution 
and bylaws ratified December 5, 1938, as the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe 
of Indians of Oklahoma, in order to protect our just claims and rights 
of treaties and treaty agreements with the United States; to protect our 
culture, heritage, and religion; to protect and maintain our reserved, 
allotted, and other lands; to manage our tribal land and property; to 
transact our tribal business and economic enterprises in domestic 
and foreign trade; to negotiate with representatives of Federal, State, 
local and tribal governments, in regard to all matters of ourselves and 
our posterity, do hereby establish this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this federally recognized Indian tribe shall be the Absentee- 
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE II - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe shall extend to all tribally 
owned land and all restricted or trust land belonging to tribal members 
within the boundary of the reservation established by Agreement dated 
June 26, 1890, and ratified by the Act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. 1019), 
and such other land, or interest in land, which may be subsequently 
acquired.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians 
of Oklahoma shall consist of the following persons:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood enrolled or who were entitled 
to be enrolled on the official census roll of the tribe as of 
January 1, 1937. All Indian blood shown on that roll shall be 
considered to be blood of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe.

(b)  All children of Absentee-Shawnee blood bom to any 
member of the tribe between January 1, 1937, and April 17, 1954, 
the effective date of Amendment II to the 1938 constitution and 
bylaws.

(c)  All children born since April 17, 1954, who are of at 
least one-fourth (1/4) degree Absentee-Shawnee blood.

Sec. 2. From and after the effective date of this Constitution no person 
shall be enrolled as a member of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe unless 
he possesses at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Absentee-Shawnee Indian 
blood.

Sec. 3. Any person entitled to membership who has been enrolled 
as a member of another tribe may be enrolled in the Absentee-Shawnee 
Tribe; provided that person has not shared in land or money as a member 
of another tribe; and provided further, that person relinquishes in 
writing and officially terminates membership in the other tribe.

Sec. 4. All persons, desiring to be enrolled members of the tribe, 
who are not presently enrolled, must submit an enrollment application 
to the Secretary of the Executive Committee for subsequent approval or 
disapproval of the Executive Committee. Applications for membership 
must be supported by birth certificates or other records recognized by 
State or Federal officials. Such document or copies thereof shall be 
kept by the Executive Committee for their permanent records.

Sec. 5. The General Council shall have power to prescribe rules and 
regulations by ordinance, covering future membership including adoptions 
and the loss of membership.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - TRIBAL GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. General Council. The supreme governing body of the tribe 
shall be the General Council consisting of all members of the tribe 
eighteen (18) years of age or older who are duly registered to vote 
pursuant to Article VI, Section 3 of this Constitution. The General 
Council shall have the power by majority vote of a quorum to dictate 
the actions of the Executive Committee through actions taken at General 
Council meetings within limitations set forth in this Constitution. The 
General Council shall also have the power to direct all entities of 
the tribal government through the procedures of initiative and/or 
referendum as specified in Article IX, and shall exercise such other 
powers as defined in this. Constitution.

The tribal government, as described in this Article, is composed of 
two (2) separate branches, i.e., the Judicial Branch and the Legislative/ 
Executive Branch. In addition, there is an independent body charged 
with the responsibility for conducting tribal elections. Each of these 
entities is directly responsible to the General Council.

Sec. 2. Legislative /Executive Branch.

(a)  Executive Committee. There shall be an Executive 
Committee consisting of five (5) representatives including 
Governor, Lt. Governor, Secretary, Treasurer and a 
Representative, all of which shall be elected by referendum. 
Such committee shall have both legislative and executive 
powers as set forth in Article V.

(b)  Previous Governing Body. The five (5) Business 
Committee members elected under the previous 
constitution shall serve until the expiration of their terms of 
office, unless earlier removed, or until their successors 
are duly elected and installed,

The first election for Executive Committee members and other elective 
officials under this Constitution shall be conducted by the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs and held on the third Saturday of June following the ratifica
tion of this Constitution. At that election the positions of Governor and 
Secretary shall each be filled for a two (2) year term, the offices 
of Lt. Governor, Treasurer and Representative shall be filled for a one 
(1) year term. Thereafter, there shall be annual elections in June and 
all terms shall be two (2) years in length.

Sec. 3. Judicial Branch. There shall be a tribal judicial system 
consisting of a Tribal Court and an Appeals Court. Members of each 
court shall be elected by tribal referendum. Candidates must meet 
those qualifications set forth in Article XIV.

(a)  Tribal Court. The lower court shall be composed 
of five (5) members initially elected at the first regular 
election (third Saturday in June) following ratification of 
this Constitution. The Tribal Court shall consist of a 
Chief Judge, Associate Judge, Clerk of the Court, and 
two (2) Tribal Judges. At the first election the Chief 
Judge and one (1) Tribal Judge shall each be elected for a 
three (3) year term, the Clerk of the Court and the other 
Tribal Judge shall each be elected for a two (2) year term, 
and the Associate Judge shall be elected for a one (1) year 
term. Thereafter, there shall be annual elections in June 
and all terms shall be three (3) years in length.

The Chief Judge shall be the presiding officer and the 
remaining four (4) members, including the Clerk of the 
Court, shall participate in the deliberations of that body.

The Tribal Court shall have duties and jurisdiction as 
established by tribal ordinances. The Tribal Court 
shall make known its decisions in writing to the 
Executive Committee, or other tribal entity whose 
decision is being disputed, and the aggrieved party. 
Such tribal entity will then reconsider its previous 
decision based on those recommendations.

(b)  Appeals Court. There shall be an Appeals Court 
composed of five (5) members initially elected at the 
first regular election (third Saturday in June) following 
ratification of this Constitution. The Appeals Court 
shall consist of a Chief Justice, Associate Justice, 
Court Recorder and two (2) Appellate Justices.

At the first election the Chief Justice and one (1) Appellate 
Justice shall each be elected for a four (4) year term, the 
Associate Justice shall be elected for three (3) years, the 
Court Recorder shall be elected for two (2) years and 
the remaining Appellate Justice shall be elected for a 
term of one (1) year. Thereafter, there shall be annual 
elections in June and all terms shall be four (4) years in 
length.

The Chief Justice shall be the presiding officer and the 
remaining four (4) members, including the Court Recorder, 
shall participate in the deliberations of that body.

The Appeals Court may hear appeals of decisions resulting 
from actions by the Tribal Court. The Appeals Court shall 
render its decision in writing to all concerned parties 
including the Executive Committee, which decision shall 
be final and binding on all concerned parties.

Sec. 4. Independent Commissions. Included as part of the tribal 
government is an Election Commission established pursuant to 
Article VI. Other such entities may be created as needed by 
referendum of the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS

 
 Section 1. The General Council of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of 
Indians of Oklahoma assembled, shall exercise all powers pertaining 
to the tribe, subject to any limitations imposed by this Constitution 
or by Federal Law, and except as otherwise provided in Section 2 
of this Article. Only the General Council shall exercise the following
 
 

 
 
 powers unless specifically delegated in accordance with Article IX:

(a)  Borrowing money which mortgages, encumbers, or 
endangers any tribal properties, holdings, or assets.

(b)  Purchase land or property with tribal assets.

(c)  Such additional powers, not so stipulated in this 
Constitution may be assigned and/or delegated to the 
various branches of government by referendum.

Sec. 2. The authorities and responsibilities of the Executive 
Committee shall include the following except as otherwise provided 
in this Constitution.

(a)  To call and conduct all regularly scheduled or special 
meetings of the General Council or the Executive Committee.

(b)  To maintain the tribal treasury, a system of 
safekeeping of tribal records, documents and 
correspondence, to propose and make available for 
review semi-annual financial status reports.

(c)  Maintain the tribal membership roll, including 
the processing of membership applications, 
annotating the roll to reflect deceased members, 
recording name changes and correct addresses.

(d)  Execute leases, contracts and permits; implement 
goals and objectives adopted by the General Council.

(e)  Appoint such subcommittees as are necessary to 
develop the proposals suggested herein or any other 
worthwhile endeavors including delegation of such 
authorities to these subcommittees as is commensurate 
with their responsibilities.

(f)  Employ legal counsel to represent the tribe.

Sec. 3. The authorities and responsibilities of the Judicial Branch 
shall include the following:

(a)  Shall call and conduct hearings pursuant to the 
provisions of this Constitution and tribal ordinances for 
the purpose of rendering a decision resulting from an 
internal disputed issue. Specific responsibilities and
procedures shall be set forth in ordinances drafted by 
this Branch working in concert with the Executive 
Committee and ratified by a referendum of the General 
Council. Included shall be a draft of a personnel 
management ordinance which shall provide safeguards 
for tribal employees and guarantee their right of access 
to the tribal courts. These drafts shall be presented to 
the General Council for adoption or rejection at the 
second General Council meeting in April following the 
ratification of this Constitution.

(b)  The Judicial Branch shall be made up of a lower 
court called the Tribal Court and an upper court called 
the Appeals Court.

Sec. 4. The authorities of the Election Commission shall be in 
accordance with Article VI of this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election. The first election of tribal officials under 
this Constitution (on the third Saturday in June following its ratification) 
shall be conducted by the Bureau of Indian Affairs under procedures 
it develops. Such election shall include balloting to elect persons 
to serve on the Executive Committee, the Tribal Court, the Appeals 
Court, and the Election Commission.

Sec. 2. Election Commission. There shall be an Election Commission 
consisting of five (5) tribal members including Election Commissioner, 
Deputy Election Commissioner, Secretary, and two (2) Election Commission 
Members, all of which shall be elected by referendum. At the first 
election cited in Section 1 above, the positions of Election Commissioner 
and Election Secretary shall each be filled for a three (3) year term, 
the offices of Deputy Election Commissioner and one (1) Member shall 
each be filled for a two (2) year term; the remaining Member shall be 
elected to a one (1) year term of office. Thereafter, there shall be 
annual elections in June and all terms shall be three (3) years in length.

(a)  Duties. The Election Commission shall be available 
at all times during the year, as needed, to conduct any 
of the tribal elections provided for in this Constitution. 
Such elections shall be conducted pursuant to an Election 
Ordinance required by this Article. Also included among 
its duties is: to establish and maintain a system of voter 
registration, determine eligibility of prospective candidates 
for tribal offices (both elective and appointive), receive 
petitions and determine their validity, and perform all 
other functions necessary to insure that the democratic 
elective process is honestly and fairly administered.

(b)  Installation of Officers. Except for the first election 
under this Constitution, the Election Commissioner shall 
call the first meeting of the Executive Committee within 
thirty (30) days following the date of the June election and 
preside over the installation of newly elected officers which 
shall include those elected to the Judicial Branch and the 
Election Commission.

Sec. 3. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections specified in this 
Constitution shall be conducted in accordance with an Election 
Ordinance to be drafted jointly by the Executive Committee and the 
Election Commission in cooperation with representatives of the 
Judicial Branch. That ordinance shall become effective upon its 
ratification by a referendum of the General Council. In order to have 
procedures available for the Election Commission to use in conducting 
the second annual election under this Constitution, a proposed Election 
Ordinance shall be presented to a referendum vote no later than 
October following the first annual election under this Constitution. 
Until an Election Ordinance is duly ratified, the Election Commission 
shall use those regulations developed for the first election.

The Election Ordinance shall be consistent with this Constitution and 
shall include, but not be limited to, the following provisions: voter 
registration, absentee balloting, secret ballots, settling of election 
disputes, avoidance of nepotism, handling of petitions which shall be 
signed only by registered voters and which shall require the designation 
of a spokesman empowered to clarify the intent of such petition and 
shall require that a summary of the petition’s objective shall appear 
on each sheet of the petition, the installation of newly elected officials, 
recall of officials, and any other matters relating to the responsibility 
of the Election Commission.

Sec. 4. Fees. The Election Commission is empowered to establish 
reasonable fees which shall bo required of all those who file as

candidates for elective office, and shall be responsible for using such 
fees to pay for necessary costs in conducting the election process. The 
Commission shall adopt a procedure for the safe handling of all funds 
by a Treasurer it shall elect from within the Commission membership, 
who shall be bonded in the manner provided for the Treasurer in Section 
4 of Article XIII. The Commission shall have conducted an annual 
audit of its finances and present a copy of such audit report to the 
General Council at the October semi-annual meeting. Copies shall 
also be provided to the Executive Committee and, upon request, to 
any tribal member.

Sec. 5. Conflict of Interest. Members of the Election Commission 
shall be responsible to disqualify themselves and withdraw from all 
functions of their positions during any election or process in which 
a conflict of interest exists. Such persons shall resume their duties 
only when there is no longer a conflict of interest. The Commission 
shall have authority, by majority vote, to disqualify any of its members 
in the event they continue to function in a conflict of interest situation.

The Election Ordinance shall describe what constitutes a conflict of 
interest. However, included in that description shall be the event 
where someone from the immediate family of a Commission Member 
is a candidate for any elective tribal office. Also to be included is a 
provision that Commission Members shall not be eligible to become 
candidates for any elective tribal office, other than for reelection to 
the Commission, until one (1) year has passed following completion 
of their service on the Election Commission.

Sec. 6. Alternates. In order to keep the Election Commission up to 
its full complement, that body is empowered to appoint alternates who 
shall attend meetings of that body and be available to function as regular 
members as the need arises during conflict of interest situations or 
other absences.

Sec. 7. Kinds of Elections.

(a)  Annual Election: Held on the third Saturday in June 
primarily for the purpose of electing persons to fill 
those positions whose terms expire for the given year. 
It is conducted by the Election Commission. Voting 
is by secret ballot at polling places. Absentee voting 
is permitted. Unless provision is made in the Election 
Ordinance for a run off, the outcome of this election 
shall be decided by plurality.

(b)  Tribal Referendum: An election conducted by voting 
at polling places rather than at a General Council meeting.

Referendum elections are for the purpose of deciding on issues 
of major importance which are usually set forth in Tribal 
Ordinances. This is an opportunity for the voters to 
participate in making Tribal laws pursuant to this 
Constitution. A majority of votes cast shall decide the 
issue. Certain kinds of issues are required by this 
Constitution to be decided by referendum. The Executive 
Committee or a General Council meeting may also
refer issues or questions to the registered voters for 
a referendum election. See Article IX.

(c)  Initiative. A referendum election which is initiated 
by the registered voters in the manner set forth in 
Article IX.

(d)  Recall. An election initiated by the registered voters 
through a petition for the purpose of voting on whether an 
elected official should be recalled from office. Upon its receipt 
of a valid petition as set forth in Article VII, the Election 
Commission is required to conduct a referendum election 
to consider recall of an elected official. A majority of ballots 
cast shall decide the matter. Any resulting vacancy shall be 
filled pursuant to Article VIII.

(e)  General Council Election. There are certain powers 
which, by terms of this Constitution, are to be exercised 
by the registered voters of the tribe meeting in General 
Council. Such enactments by a majority vote of a quorum 
of the General Council meeting, which are consistent with 
this Constitution and Tribal Ordinances, are binding on the 
Executive Committee. Voting at General Council meetings 
on tribal legislation shall be by secret ballot.

(f)  Constitutional Amendment. Conducted by the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs pursuant to regulations of the Secretary 
of the Interior and the provisions of Article XII of this 
Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. Removal. Each elected body of the government shall 
have the power to remove any of its member for a justifiable 
cause by an affirmative vote of three (3) of its members. The Judicial 
Branch and Executive Committee shall jointly enact regulations providing 

for such removals. These regulations shall be used in removal 
proceedings by each of the other elected bodies of the tribal government. 
Included in these regulations shall be procedures for the defendant 
to confront the plaintiff in answer to a written statement of the charges 
at a special meeting of the responsible committee, court, or commission, 
called for that purpose. The defendant shall be provided with the written 
statement of charges at least fifteen (15) days prior to the removal meeting.

Sec. 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least 
thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters of the tribe, it shall be 
the duty of the Election Commission to call and conduct within sixty (60) 
days, an election for the purpose of recall of an elected tribal official. 
The election shall be conducted pursuant to the Election Ordinance.
Only one (1) member of that elected body shall be considered for recall 
at any given recall election. This shall not prohibit one (1) member 
from each elected body from being considered for recall during a single 
election.

Sec. 3. Forfeiture. It shall be the duty of the affected elected body 
to immediately declare a position within its body vacant and to promptly 
fill such vacancy in the manner provided in Article VIII when it is 
determined that the incumbent:

(a)  Has tendered resignation;

(b)  Has been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty in a 
court of competent jurisdiction;

(c)  Has been convicted of a felony while in office by a 
court of competent jurisdiction;

(d)  Has falsified his application or has omitted information 
concerning a conviction of a felony or any crime involving 
dishonesty, when filing to be a candidate for elective office.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Vacancies in any elective office shall be promptly filled 
by the remaining members of the affected body appointing a person 
who qualifies pursuant to Article XIV. Such appointee shall serve 
until a replacement is duly elected at the next annual election and 
installed in office, except as it relates to filling a vacancy in the office 
of Governor in Section 2 of Article XIII.

Sec. 2. An appointee shall not be used to temporarily fill a vacancy 
in either of the two (2) highest ranking positions on an elective body.

Rather, it shall be the responsibility of that body to temporarily shift 
its members so that appointees shall serve in positions of lesser rank.

Sec. 3. In the event two (2) vacancies exist in the Executive Committee, 
the authorities of that body are limited to the payment of utility bills 
and salaries until those vacancies have been filled by appointment.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Initiative. The procedure whereby registered voters may 
exercise their right to enact legislation that will be binding on the 
Executive Committee and the Tribe. Upon receipt of a valid petition 
signed by at least twenty percent (20%) of the registered voters, it 
shall be the duty of the Election Commissioner to call and conduct 
such initiative election within sixty (60) days, presenting to the 
registered voters for their determination such issues or questions 
which are set forth in the petition. The decision of the majority of 
those voting shall be binding on the tribe.

Sec. 2. Referendum. The procedure whereby all registered voters 
of the tribe have an opportunity to express themselves directly by 
voting on any enacted or proposed legislation (See Sec. 7(b) of . 
Article VI). Both secret balloting and an opportunity for absentee 
voting shall be provided in tribal referendum elections pursuant to the 
Election Ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE X - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 The protections guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 77), against actions of a tribe in exercising 
its powers of self-government shall apply to the Absentee-Shawnee 
Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, its officers and all persons within its 
jurisdiction.

All members of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 
shall be accorded equal rights pursuant to tribal law. No member 
shall be denied any of the rights or guarantees enjoyed by citizens 
under the Constitution of the United States, including, but not limited 
to, freedom of religion and conscience, freedom of speech, the right 
to orderly association or assembly, the right to petition for action or the 
redress of grievances, and due process of law. Employment of legal 
counsel for the tribe shall be in accord with Title VI of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1968.

It is provided in this Constitution that the acceptance of the Indian Civil 
Rights Act (82 Stat. 77) does not waive the tribe’s inherent right of 
immunity from suit.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All actions of the Business Committee taken under the previous 
Constitution shall remain in full force and effect except to the extent 
they are inconsistent with this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a resolution of the 
Executive Committee, or by a petition signed by at least twenty percent 
(20%) of the registered voters of the Tribe, and if approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to a referendum vote 
conducted pursuant to the Secretary's, regulations and shall be effective 
if ratified by a majority of those who cast ballots, provided at least 
twenty percent (20%) of those registered to vote, cast ballots in such 
election.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Tribal officers may, from time to time, in carrying out their official 
responsibilities, be required to attend functions of National, State, 
local or private organizations as an official representative of the tribe. 
In such cases, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the tribal 
official to conduct himself in a manner befitting the office he holds 
and the people he represents.

Section 1. The Governor shall call and preside over all meetings of 
the General Council and the Executive Committee except as provided 
in Article XVI or any other applicable provision of this Constitution 
or subsequent ordinances, and shall be accountable for the exercise 
of those duties specifically assigned to him by this Constitution, and 
such additional authorities which may be delegated by either the General 
Council or the Executive Committee. He shall be held responsible 
for executing the policies established by the General Council. A 
semi-annual report shall be given to the General Council at its April 
and October meetings. Such report shall be given orally and in writing 
by the Governor as outlined in Article V. The Governor shall make 
an oral report on all of his activities, meetings, and conferences at 
the monthly Executive Committee meetings. The Governor shall file 

an agenda with the Executive Committee Secretary, three (3) days 
prior to a regularly scheduled Executive Committee meeting. The Governor 
shall not vote except in the case of a tie.

Sec. 2. The Lieutenant Governor, in the absence of the Governor, or 
during procedures to remove or recall him, shall possess all of the 
privileges, authority, and responsibility of the office of Governor. In 
case of a vacancy in the office of the Governor, the Lieutenant Governor 
shall succeed at once to that office and shall serve for the remainder 
of the Governor's unexpired term. The resulting vacancy in the office 
of Lieutenant Governor shall be filled pursuant to Article VIII. The 
Lieutenant Governor shall have such other duties as maybe delegated 
to him by the Governor, by actions of the Executive Committee, or 
General Council.

Sec. 3. The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all meetings under 
the direction of the Governor. The Secretary shall be responsible for 
preparing timely notices of all meetings and the dissemination of such 
notices, as appropriate, to the Executive Committee and General Council. 
The Secretary shall prepare and read the minutes of the previous meeting 
and call to the attention of the Executive Committee any unfinished 
business. The Secretary shall read to the Committee all communications 
of official business which must be acted upon by the Executive Committee. 
The Secretary shall certify all official business transactions taken by 
the General Council and the Executive Committee. All records, minutes, 
documents and correspondence for which the Secretary is responsible 
shall be on file at the tribal headquarters at all times. The Secretary 
shall be the custodian of the tribal membership roll and shall give 
priority to keeping it current. Responsibilities as tribal membership 
roll custodian shall be limited to the following: (a) The timely processing 
of new membership applications which shall be approved or disapproved 
by the Executive Committee, (b) Annotating the roll to reflect deceased 
members, (c) Recording official name changes and/or changes of address. 
(d) Prompt reply to questions and confirmation of enrollment.

The Secretary shall have a working knowledge of the Treasurer’s duties 
and responsibilities. The Secretary shall accept and be responsible for 
other duties as assigned by the Executive Committee. In the absence 
of the Governor, and the Lieutenant Governor, the Secretary shall assume 
the position of Governor Pro-Tem, except in case of vacancies of the two 
(2) top positions.

Sec. 4. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all monies, and related 
bookkeeping functions, which come under the jurisdiction or control 
of the tribe. The Treasurer shall conserve, invest, and pay out money 
pursuant to the provisions of this Constitution. All expenditures shall 
be reviewed and approved or disapproved by the Executive Committee 

before payment. The authority to approve or disapprove such expenditures 
shall be based on constitutional authority and/or a duly adopted General 
Council resolution or ordinance pursuant to the provisions of this Constitution. 
Subject to the limitations above, the Executive Committee shall render 
in writing such approval or disapproval that shall be maintained as a 
permanent part of the bookkeeping record. The Treasurer shall, upon 
receipt of written approval, be authorized to sign checks or otherwise
make payment on behalf of the tribe. The Treasurer shall keep and 
maintain an accurate account of all receipts and disbursements and
shall report the accurate amounts of each account to the Executive 
Committee at each regular meeting. The Treasurer shall submit 
financial reports and results of audits pursuant to the provisions in 
Article V. Such reports and audits shall be equival nt to National 
Accounting Association practices and standards. The Treasurer shall 
keep double-entry accounting records, which shall be fully implemented 
within one (1) year following the first election of officers under this 
Constitution. The financial records shall be maintained at the tribal 
headquarters. The Treasurer shall be bonded by a bonafide banding 
company in an amount satisfactory to the Executive Committee and 
such bonding fees shall be paid from tribal funds or program funds 
if authorized by the funding agency.

Sec. 5. The Representative shall be a full voting member of the 
Executive Committee and shall perform such duties, and responsibilities 
as may be delegated to him by the Executive Committee and/or the 
General Council.

Sec. 6. Judicial Branch Officials. The duties of such officials shall 
be set forth in the Judicial Ordinance which shall be consistent with this 
Constitution. That ordinance shall include a provision for the Chief 
Justice to call and conduct any meeting or election that the Executive 
Committee or Election Commission has failed to call even though 
such meeting or election has been mandated by this Constitution or 
a valid petition, except as provided in Section 2 of Article XVI.

Sec. 7. Independent Commissions. The duties of Election Commission 
officials shall be set forth in the Election Ordinance. Any future 
commissions, which may be established by referendum, shall be subject to 
a separate ordinance which shall be established pursuant to this Constitution 
and any limitations placed on it by the General Council within the scope 
of its stated purpose.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES

 
 Section 1. Before being declared a candidate for any elective office, 

each prospective candidate must show that the following qualifications 
have been met:

(a)  An enrolled member of the tribe.

(b)  A registered voter for purposes of voting in tribal 
elections.

(c)  At least twenty-one (21) years of age on the date of the 
election for which he desires to be a candidate.

(d)  Physically reside within the following Oklahoma counties: 
Cleveland, Potawatomie, Oklahoma, McClain, Garvin, 
Pontotoc, Seminole, Lincoln, or Okfuskee.

(e)  In cases where a prospective candidate has been convicted 
of a felony, such person shall not be eligible for consideration 
as a candidate until at least five (5) years have passed 
following completion of the penalty for such conviction(s).

(f)  Not more than one (1) member of an immediate family 
shall be a candidate for election to the same tribal 
elective body. Provisions shall be set forth in the Election 
Ordinance to deal with such concept.

Sec. 2. Specific qualifications, in addition to those in Section 1, may 
be imposed if approved by tribal referendum.

Sec. 3. Appointments to fill vacancies, or for any other purpose, shall 
be filled by persons who meet the qualifications of this Article and any 
specific qualifications which may be imposed pursuant to Section 2 of 
this Article.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. First Election. Within ten (10) days following certification 
of results of the first election under this Constitution, the Superintendent 
of the Bureau of Indian Affairs shall call and conduct a meeting of 
newly elected persons for the purpose of installing the successful 
candidates in their respective offices.

Sec.2. After the first installation of officers, it shall be the duty of 
the Election Commissioner to call and conduct meetings of newly elected 
officials within ten (10) days following certification of election results, 
for purposes of installing them in office which shall include administering 

an oath of office. The content of such oath shall be set forth in the 
Election Ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI  - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. General Council meetings shall be held semi-annually in April 
and October on dates to be set by the Executive Committee. Notices shall 
be posted at appropriate places at least fifteen (15) days prior to each 
General Council meeting.

Sec. 2. Special General Council meetings maybe called by the Governor 
and shall be called and conducted by him when directed to do so by 
a majority vote of a quorum of the Executive Committee. In the event 
he refuses to call a meeting when so directed, the highest ranking 
official who favors calling the meeting, shall be empowered to exercise 
that authority.

Sec. 3. Executive Committee meetings shall be held monthly at tribal 
headquarters on dates to be established by the Executive Committee 
by public notice. Written notification shall be provided to each Committee 
Member at least five (5) days in advance. The Committee may hold 
meetings at another location provided all members are so advised 
in the advance notice.

Sec. 4. Special meetings of the Executive Committee may be called 
by the Governor as necessary with advance individual written notice. 
Any three (3) members of the Executive Committee may call a special 
meeting of that body by presenting a written notice to all members 
of the Committee. If the Governor fails to attend, the highest ranking 
of those who called the meeting shall be empowered to conduct the meeting, 
provided a quorum is present.

Sec. 5. All meetings of each of the tribal elective bodies are closed 
to non-tribal members unless they are on official business with the 
tribe, or are otherwise invited to attend by the respective body.

Sec. 6. Procedures for calling and conducting meetings of tribal 
elective bodies, other than the Executive Committee, shall be set 
forth by each such body in an appropriate resolution which shall be 
consistent with this Constitution.

Sec. 7. Except where otherwise provided in this Constitution, all 
meetings shall be conducted in accordance with adopted procedures.

Sec. 8. Legal notices shall be published in a local newspaper in the 
counties mentioned in Article XIV, Sec. 1(d).
 
 

ARTICLE XVII  - QUORUM

 
 Section 1. Executive Committee, Tribal Court, Appeals Court, and 
Election Commission Meetings. in any duly called meeting of the above 
elected bodies any three (3) members of that particular body shall 
constitute a quorum to transact business within the scope of authority 
of that body.

Sec. 2. General Council meeting. Fifty (50) members of the General 
Council, who are registered tribal voters, shall constitute a quorum to 
transact business at any duly called General Council Meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - TRIBAL LEGISLATION

 
 The Executive Committee is the body primarily responsible for legislative 
functions. However, the General Council, by means of referendum, 
initiative, or in meetings of that body, has reserved to itself certain 
legislative authorities. Enactments of the General Council shall, in 
most cases, be set forth in ordinances. The Executive Committee, 
in implementing such ordinances, or in executing its legislative function, 
shall adopt resolutions. Recognizing that there are certain actions or 
expressions each governing entity will make which do not specifically 
constitute tribal legislation, they shall be set forth in motions. A motion 
is an expression initiated in a General Council meeting by any registered 
tribal voter, or in meetings of the Executive Committee by a member 
of that body. The forms of tribal legislation are defined as follows:

Resolution. A formal written expression of opinion or will. 
Resolutions are subordinate to, and must be consistent with 
Tribal Ordinances and terms of this Constitution. Resolutions 
shall be used as necessary to set forth rules, regulations, and 
procedures for the purpose of implementing the intent of Tribal 
Ordinances.

Ordinance. An enactment of the General Council at a tribal 
referendum; a separate document which shall have long-range 
effect, such as, establishing procedures governing: the conduct 
of elections, removing elected officials or the manner of 
enrolling tribal members. Ordinances are tribal laws which 
shall have general application and shall remain in effect until 
amended or rescinded in the same manner in which they were 
enacted. Ordinances shall not conflict with this Constitution. 
In the event a subsequent constitutional amendment is enacted 
that would conflict with an ordinance, that ordinance, or
conflicting portion thereof, shall be null and void.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - RATIFICATION

 
 This Constitution shall be effective when approved by the Secretary of 
the Interior, or his authorized representative, and ratified by a majority 
of the General Council of the tribe voting in an election authorized by 
the Secretary of the Interior and conducted under regulations 
promulgated pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare 
Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, ___________________________

, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 

by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by 

the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), as amended, and delegated 

to me by 230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve the Constitution of the 

Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma; provided that nothing 

in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under the 

constitution that would be contrary to Federal law.
 
  
 

(SGD) THEODORE KRENZKE

 
 Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: FEB 4 1977 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION


Pursuant to an order approved February 4, 1977 , by the Acting Deputy 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the foregoing Constitution of the 

Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma was submitted for 

ratification to the adult members of the Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of 

Indians of Oklahoma and was on June 4. 1977 , duly ratified by a 

vote of 95 for, and 77 against, in an election in which a

majority of the 172 qualified voters cast their ballots in 

accordance with Article X of the tribe’s constitution and Section 3 of the 

Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

Date: June 4, 1977

