 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 
OF THE 
ABSENTEE SHAWNEE TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF OKLAHOMA

 
 *(Language that appears in italics and that is surrounded by parenthesis is reference 
material only. It is not intended to be part of the Constitution nor should it be used to 
interpret the intent of any of the provisions of the Constitution.)
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the people of the Big Jim and White Turkey Bands of the Shawnee Nation of American 
Indians initially organized pursuant to a constitution and bylaws ratified December 5, 1938, as the 
Absentee
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, in order to protect our just claims and rights of treaties 
and treaty agreements with the United States; to protect our culture, heritage and religion; to 
protect and maintain our reserved, allotted and other lands; to manage our tribal land and 
property; to transact our tribal business and economic enterprises in domestic and foreign trade; 
to negotiate with representatives of Federal, State, local and tribal governments, in regard to all 
matters of ourselves and our posterity, do hereby establish this Constitution.

ARTICLE I – NAME

The name of the federally recognized Indian tribe shall be Absentee-Shawnee Tribe of Indians of 
Oklahoma.

ARTICLE II – JURISDICTION

*(Amendment I, ratified August 11, 1988, Broadened jurisdiction, allowed for the 
development of tribal code law, and provided a set of rules for the judicial branch of 
government.)

SECTION 1. The jurisdiction and governmental powers of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of 
Indians of Oklahoma shall, consistent with applicable federal law, extend to all persons and to all 
real and personal property, including lands and natural resources, and to all waters and air space 
within Indian Country as defined in 18 U.S.C. 1151 or its successor, over which the Absentee 
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma has authority within the boundary of the tribal jurisdiction 
established by Agreement dated June 26, 1890 and ratified by the Act of March 3, 1891 (26 Stat. 
1019), and such other land or interest in land, which may be subsequently acquired.

SECTION 2. The jurisdiction and governmental powers of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of 
Indians of Oklahoma shall also, consistent with the applicable Federal law, extend outside the 
exterior boundaries of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma.

SECTION 3. The exercise by the tribe of its jurisdiction and governmental powers shall be 
incorporated in appropriate legislation enacted by the Tribe and embodied in a tribal code in order 
to promulgate procedural rules for a tribal judicial system, and to establish and provide for a tribal 
law enforcement agency, tribal regulatory bodies and other appropriate administrative agencies of 
the Tribe.

ARTICLE III – MEMBERSHIP

*(Amendment VI, ratified November 19, 2010, decreased blood 
degree from  to 1/8.)

SECTION 1. The membership of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma shall 
consist of the following persons:

a)  All persons of Indian blood enrolled or who were entitled to be enrolled on the official 

census roll of the tribe as of January 1, 1937. All Indian blood shown on that roll shall be 
considered to be blood of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe.

b)  All children of Absentee Shawnee blood born to any member of the tribe between 

January 1, 1937 and April 17, 1954, the effective date of Amendment II to the 1938 
constitution and bylaws.

c)  All individuals with at least one-eight (1/8) degree Absentee Shawnee blood.

SECTION 2. From and after the effective date of this Constitution no person shall be enrolled as 
a member of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe unless he possesses at least one-eight (1/8) degree 
Absentee Shawnee Indian blood.

SECTION 3. Any person entitled to membership who has been enrolled as a member of another 
tribe may be enrolled in the Absentee Shawnee Tribe; provided that person has not shared in land 
or money as a member of another tribe: and provided further, that person relinquishes in writing 
and officially terminates membership in the other tribe.

SECTION 4. All persons, desiring to be enrolled members of the tribe, who are not presently 
enrolled, must submit an enrollment application to the Secretary of the Executive Committee for 
subsequent approval or disapproval of the Executive Committee. Applications for membership 
must be supported by birth certificates or other records recognized by State or Federal officials. 
Such documents or copies thereof shall be kept by the Executive Committee for their permanent 
records.

SECTION 5 . The General Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations by 
ordinance, covering future membership including adoptions and the loss of membership.
 
 

ARTICLE IV- TRIBAL GOVERNMENT

 
 *(Amendment II; ratified August 9, 1988; redefined the function of the General Council.
This Amendment all restructured the Tribal Court System.)

The tribal government, as described in this Article, is composed of two (2) separate branches, i.e., 
the Judicial Branch and the Legislative/Executive Branch. In addition, there is an independent 
body charged with the responsibility for conducting tribal elections.

SECTION 1. The General Council of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe shall consist of all members of 
the Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or older and shall exercise such powers as defined in this 
Constitution.

SECTION 2. Legislative/Executive Branch

*(Amendment VIII; ratified May 10, 2019; enlarged the terms of office for elected
officials from two (2) years to four (4) years.)

(a)  Executive Committee. There shall be an Executive Committee consisting of five (5) 
representatives including Governor, Lt. Governor, Secretary, Treasurer and a 
Representative. All members of the Executive Committee shall be elected by referendum 
and shall serve until the expiration of their term of office, unless earlier removed, or until 
their duly elected successors are sworn and installed into their office. Such committee 
shall have both legislative and executive powers as set forth in Article V.

(b) Term of Office. The term of office for Executive Committee members shall be four (4) 
years.

SECTION 3. Judicial Branch The judicial power of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Oklahoma is 
hereby vested in one Supreme Court consisting of seven (7) Justices and such inferior courts as 
may be established by Tribal Law.

(a)  The Courts of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma shall be courts of 
general jurisdiction and shall further have jurisdiction in all cases arising under the 
Constitution, Laws and treaties of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma. The 
Supreme Court shall have original jurisdiction in such cases as may be provided by law and 
shall have jurisdiction in all cases.

(b)  The Tribal Courts, in any action brought before them, shall have the power of judicial 
review, in appropriate cases, in order to declare that legislative enactments of the Executive 
Committee or the Council, are unconstitutional under this Constitution or prohibited by 
Federal statues and void. In such cases, the Court shall have the authority to declare such act 
void and to issue injunctive relief.

(c)  The Supreme Court Justices and Tribal Court Judges shall be selected by the Executive 
Committee and shall serve six (6) year terms and until their successor be duly installed. At 
the expiration of any term, each Justice or Judge may, at his option, be considered for 
reconfirmation to a new term by the Executive Committee.

(d)  Vacancies in tribal judicial offices may be filled by appointment of the Executive 
Committee for the remainder of the unexpired term.

(e)  This Article shall be effective upon enactment of enabling legislation by the Executive 
Committee, and the installation in office of the Justices and Judges according to this Article.
 
 

ARTICLE V- POWERS

 
 *(Amendment III: ratified August 9, 1988: redefines the authorities and responsibilities 
of the Executive Committee.)

SECTION 1. The General Council of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 
reserves and shall exclusively exercise the following powers, unless such powers are specifically 

delegated to the Executive Committee or other appropriate tribal entity in accordance with the 
process set forth in Article IX:

(a)  Borrowing money which mortgages, encumbers or endangers any existing tribal 
properties, holdings or assets.

(b)  Purchase land or property with tribal trust assets.

(c)  Such additional powers, not so stipulated in this Constitution may be assigned and/or 
delegated to the various branches of government by referendum.

SECTION 2. Except for those powers expressly reserved to the General Council of the Absentee 
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma by this Constitution, the Executive Committee is 
empowered to enact legislation, transact business and otherwise speak or act on behalf of the 
Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma in all matters on which the Tribe is empowered 
to act now or in the future, including the authority to hire legal counsel to represent the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE VI-ELECTIONS

 
 *(Amendment IV; ratified August 9, 1988; changes the terms “voter registration” and 
“registered voter” to “eligible voter” throughout the Constitution. Amendment VII; 
ratified May 10, 2019; eliminated the authority of the Secretary of Interior over the 
amendment process.)

SECTION 1. First Election The first election of tribal officials under this Constitution (on the 
third Saturday in June following its ratification) shall be conducted by the Bureau of Indians 
Affairs under procedures it develops. Such election shall include balloting to elect persons to 
serve on the Executive Committee, the Tribal Court, the Appeals Court, and the Election 
Commission.

SECTION 2. Election Commission There shall be an Election Commission consisting of five (5) 
tribal members including Election Commissioner, Deputy Election Commissioner, Secretary, and 
two (2) Election Commission Members, all of which shall be elected by referendum. At the first 
election cited in Section 1 above, the positions of Election Commissioner and Election Secretary 
shall be filled for a three (3) year term; the offices of Deputy Election Commissioner and one (1) 
Member shall be filled for a two (2) year term; the remaining Member shall be elected to a one 
(1) year term of office. Thereafter, there shall be annual elections in June and all terms shall be 
three (3) years in length.

(a)  Duties The Election Commission shall be available at all times during the year, as 
needed, to conduct any of the tribal elections provided for in this Constitution. Such elections 
shall be conducted pursuant to an Election Ordinance required by this Article. Also included 
among its duties is: Determine eligibility of prospective candidates for tribal offices (both 
elective and appointive), receive petitions and determine their validity, and perform all other 
functions necessary to insure that the democratic elective process is honestly and fairly 
administered.

(b)  Installation of Officers Except for the first election under this Constitution, the Election 
Commissioner shall call the first meeting of the Executive Committee within thirty (30) days 
following the date of the June election and preside over the installation of newly elected 
officers which shall include those elected to Judicial Branch and Election Commission.

SECTION 3. Election Ordinance All tribal elections specified in this Constitution shall be 
conducted in accordance with an Election Ordinance to be drafted jointly by the Executive 
Committee and the Election Commission in cooperation with representatives of the Judicial 
Branch. That ordinance shall become effective upon its ratification by a referendum of the 
General Council. In order to have procedures available for the Election Commission to use in 
conducting the second annual election under this Constitution, a proposed Election Ordinance 
shall be presented to a referendum vote no later than October following the first annual election 
under this Constitution. Until an Election Ordinance is duly ratified, the Election Commission 
shall use those regulations developed for the first election.

The Election Ordinance shall be consistent with this Constitution and shall include, but not be 
limited to, the following provisions: Absentee Balloting, secret ballots, settling of election 
disputes, avoidance of nepotism, handling of petitions which shall be signed only by eligible 
voters and which require the designation of a spokesman empowered to clarify the intent of such 
petition and shall require that a summary of the petition’s objective shall appear on each sheet of 
the petition, the installation of newly elected officials, recall of officials, and any other matters 
relating to the responsibility of the Election Commission.

SECTION 4. Fees The Election Commission is empowered to establish reasonable fees which 
shall be required of all those who file as candidates for elective office, and shall be responsible 
for using such fees to pay for necessary costs in conducting the election process. The Commission 
shall adopt a procedure for the safe handling of all funds by a Treasurer it shall elect from within 
the Commission membership, who shall be bonded in the manner provided for the Treasurer in 
Section 4 of Article XIII. The Commission shall have conducted an annual audit of its finances 
and present a copy of such audit report to the General Council at the October semi-annual 
meeting. Copies shall also be provided to the Executive Committee and, upon request, to any 
tribal member.

SECTION 5. Conflict of Interest Members of the Election Commission shall be responsible to 
disqualify themselves and withdraw from all functions of their positions during any election or 
process in which a conflict of interest exists. Such persons shall resume their duties only when 
there is no longer a conflict of interest. The Commission shall have authority, by majority vote, to 
disqualify any of its members in the event they continue to function in a conflict of interest 
situation.

The Election Ordinance shall describe what constitutes a conflict of interest. However, included 
in the description shall be the event where someone from the immediate family of a Commission 
Member is a candidate for any elective tribal office. Also to be included is a provision that 
Commission Members shall not be eligible to become candidates for any elective tribal Office, 
other than for reelection to the Commission, until one (1) year has passed following completion 
of their service on the Election Commission.

SECTION 6. Alternates In order to keep the Election Commission up to its full complement, that 
body is empowered to appoint alternates who shall attend meetings of that body and be available 
to function as regular members as the need arises during conflict of interest situations or other 
absences.

SECTION 7. Kinds of Elections,

(a)  Annual Election: Held on the third Saturday in June primarily for the purpose of electing 
persons to fill those positions whose terms expire for the given year. It is conducted by the 
Election Commission. Voting is by secret ballot at polling places. Absentee voting is 

permitted. Unless provision is made in the Election Ordinance for a run off, the outcome of 
this election shall be decided by plurality.

(b)  Tribal Referendum: An election conducted by voting at polling places rather than at a 
General Council meeting. Referendum elections are for the purpose of deciding on issues of 
major importance which are usually set forth in Tribal Ordinances. This is an opportunity for 
the eligible voters to participate in making Tribal laws pursuant to this Constitution. A 
majority of votes cast shall decide the issue. Certain kinds of issues are required by this 
Constitution to be decided by referendum. The Executive Committee or a General Council 
meeting may also refer issues or questions to the eligible voters for a referendum election. 
See Article IX.

(c)  Initiative: A referendum election which is initiated by the eligible voters in a manner set 
forth in Article IX.

(d)  Recall: An election initiated by the eligible voters through a petition for the purpose of 
voting on whether an elected official should be recalled from office. Upon its receipt of a 
valid petition as set forth in Article VII, the Election Commission is required to conduct a 
referendum election to consider recall of an elected official. A majority of ballots cast shall 
decide the matter. Any resulting vacancy shall be filled pursuant to Article VIII.

(e)  General Council Election: There are certain powers which, by terms of this Constitution 
are to be exercised by the eligible voters of the tribe meeting in General Council. Voting 
General Council meetings may be by secret ballot at the pleasure of the General Council.

*(Amendment V; ratified August 9, 1988; makes this section consistent with
Amendment II.)

ARTICLE VII – REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

*(Amendment IV; ratified August 9, 1988; changes the terms “voter registration” 
and “registered voter” to “eligible voter” throughout the Constitution.)

SECTION 1. Removal. Each elected body of the government shall have the power to remove any 
of its members for a justifiable cause by an affirmative vote of three (3) members. The Judicial 
Branch and Executive Committee shall jointly enact regulations providing for such removals. 
These regulations shall be used in removal proceedings by each of the other elected bodies of the 
tribal government. Included in these regulations shall be procedures for the defendant to confront 
the plaintiff in answer to a written statement of the charges at a special meeting of the responsible 
committee, court, or commission, called for the purpose. The defendant shall be provided with the 
written statement of charges at least fifteen (15) days prior to the removal meeting.

SECTION 2. Recall Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
eligible voters of the tribe, it shall be the duty of the Election Commission to call and conduct 
within sixty (60) days, an election for the purpose of recall of an elected tribal official. The 
election shall be conducted pursuant to the Election Ordinance. Only one (1) member of that 
elected body shall be considered for recall at any given recall election. This shall not prohibit one 
(1) member from each elected body from being considered for recall during a single election.

SECTION 3. Forfeiture It shall be the duty of the affected elected body to immediately declare a 
position within its body vacant and to promptly fill such vacancy in the manner provided in 
Article VIII when it is determined that the incumbent:

(a)  Has tendered resignation;

(b)  Has been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty in a court of competent jurisdiction;

(c)  Has been convicted of a felony while in office by a court of competent jurisdiction;
(d)  Has falsified his application or has omitted information concerning a conviction of a 
felony or any crime involving dishonesty, when filing to be a candidate for elective office.

ARTICLE VIII  – VACANCIES

SECTION 1. Vacancies in any elective office shall be promptly filled by the remaining members 
of the affected body appointing a person who qualifies pursuant to Article XIV. Such appointee 
shall serve until a replacement is duly elected at the next annual election and installed in office, 
except as it relates to filling a vacancy in the office of Governor in Section 2 of Article XIII.

SECTION 2. An appointee shall not be used to temporarily fill a vacancy in either of the two (2) 
highest ranking positions on an elective body. Rather, it shall be the responsibility of that body to 
temporarily shift its members so that appointees shall serve in position of lesser rank.

SECTION 3. In the event two (2) vacancies exist in the Executive Committee, the authorities of 
that body are limited to the payment of utility bills and salaries until those vacancies have been 
filled by appointment.

ARTICLE IX – INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

*(Amendment IV; ratified August 9, 1988; changes the terms “voter registration” and 
“registered voter” to “eligible voter” throughout the Constitution.)

SECTION 1. Initiative The procedure whereby eligible voters may exercise their right to enact 
legislation that will be binding on the Executive Committee and the Tribe. Upon receipt of a valid 
petition signed by at least twenty percent (20%) of the eligible voters, it shall be the duty of the 
Election Commissioner to call and conduct such initiative election within sixty (60) days, 
presenting to the eligible voters for their determination such issues or questions which are set 
forth in the petition. The decision of the majority of those voting shall be binding on the tribe.

SECTION 2. Referendum The procedure whereby all eligible voters of the tribe have an 
opportunity to express themselves directly by voting on any enacted or proposed legislation (see 
Section 7 (b) of Article VI). Both secret balloting and an opportunity for absentee voting shall be 
provided in tribal referendum elections pursuant to the Election Ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE X 

 
 – BILL OF RIGHTS

The protections guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 77), 
against actions of a tribe in exercising its powers of self-government shall apply to the Absentee 
Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, its officers and all persons within its Jurisdiction.

All members of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma shall be accorded equal 
rights pursuant to tribal law. No member shall be denied any of the rights or guarantees enjoyed 
by citizens under the Constitution of the United States, including, but not limited to, freedom of 
religion and conscience, freedom of speech, the right to orderly association or assembly, the right 
to petition for action or the redress of grievances, and due process of law. Employment of legal 
counsel for the tribe shall be in accord with Title VI of the Civil Rights Acts of 1968.

It is provided in this Constitution that the acceptance of the Indian Civil Rights Act (82 Stat. 77) 
does not waive the tribe’s inherent right to immunity from suit.

ARTICLE XI – SAVINGS CLAUSE

All actions of the Business Committee taken under the previous Constitution shall remain in full 
force and effect except to the extent they are inconsistent with this Constitution.

ARTICLE XII – AMENDMENTS

* (Amendment IV; ratified August 9, 1988; changes the terms “voter registration” and 
“registered voter” to “eligible voter” throughout the Constitution: Amendment III; 
ratified May 10, 2019; eliminated the authority of the Secretary of Interior over the 
amendment process.)

Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a resolution of the Executive 
Committee, or by a petition signed by at least twenty percent (20%) of the eligible voters of 
the Tribe. Amendments to this Constitution shall be submitted to a referendum vote 
conducted pursuant to Article VI, Section 7(b) of this Constitution and shall be deemed 
ratified by a majority of those who cast ballots, provided at least twenty percent (20%) of 
those eligible to vote, cast ballots in such election and upon certification of said referendum 
by the Election Commission. Article XIX, which concerned the original ratification of this 
Constitution, shall no longer apply to elections called for the purpose of amending or 
replacing this Constitution.

ARTICLE XIII  – DUTIES OF OFFICERS

Tribal officers may, from time to time, in carrying out their official responsibilities, be required to 
attend functions of National, State, local or private organizations as an official representative of 
the tribe. In such cases, it shall be the duty and responsibility of the tribal official to conduct 
himself in a manner befitting the office he holds and the people he represents.

SECTION 1. The Governor shall call and preside over all meetings of the General Council and 
the Executive Committee except as provided in Article XVI or any other applicable provision of 

the Constitution or subsequent ordinances, and shall be accountable for the exercise of those 
duties specially assigned to him by this Constitution, and such additional authorities which may 
be delegated by either the General Council or the Executive Committee. He shall be held 
responsible for executing the policies established by the General Council. A semi-annual report 
shall be given to the General Council at its April and October meetings. Such report shall be 
given orally and in writing by the Governor as outlined in Article V. The Governor shall make an 
oral report on all of his activities, meetings, and conferences at the monthly Executive Committee 
meetings. The Governor shall file an agenda with the executive Committee Secretary, three days 
prior to a regularly scheduled Executive Committee meeting. The Governor shall not vote except 
in the case of a tie.

SECTION 2. The Lieutenant Governor in the absence of the Governor, or during procedures to 
remove or recall him, shall possess all other privileges, authority, and responsibility of the office 
of Governor. In case of a vacancy in the office of the Governor, the Lieutenant Governor shall 
succeed at once to the office and shall serve for the remainder of the Governor’s unexpired term. 
The resulting vacancy in the office of Lieutenant Governor shall be filled pursuant to Article VIII. 
The Lieutenant Governor shall have such other duties as may be delegated to him by the 
Governor, by actions of the Executive Committee, or General Council.

SECTION 3. The Secretary shall prepare an agenda for all meetings under the direction of the 
Governor. The Secretary shall be responsible for preparing timely notices of all meetings and the 
dissemination of such notices, as appropriate, to the Executive Committee and General Council. 
The Secretary shall prepare and read the minutes of the previous meeting and call to the attention 
of the Executive Committee any unfinished business. The Secretary shall read to the Committee 
all communications of official business which must be acted upon by the Executive Committee. 
The Secretary shall certify all official business transactions taken by the General Council and the 
Executive Committee. All records, minutes, documents and correspondence for which the 
Secretary is responsible shall be on file at the tribal headquarters at all times. The Secretary shall 
be custodian of the tribal membership roll and shall give priority to keeping it current. 
Responsibilities as tribal membership roll custodian shall be limited to the following:

(a)  The timely processing of new membership applications which shall be approved or 
disapproved by the Executive Committee.

(b)  Annotating the roll to reflect deceased members.

(c)  Recording official name changes and/or changes of address.

(d)  Prompt reply to questions and confirmation of enrollment.

The Secretary shall have a working knowledge of the Treasure’s duties and responsibilities. The 
Secretary shall accept and be responsible for other duties as assigned by the Executive 
Committee. In the absence of the Governor and Lieutenant Governor, the Secretary shall assume 
the position of Governor Pro-Temp, except in case of vacancies of the two (2) top positions.

SECTION 4. The Treasurer shall be custodian of all monies, and related bookkeeping functions, 
which come under the jurisdiction or control of the tribe. The Treasurer shall conserve, invest, 
and pay out money pursuant to the provisions of this Constitution. All expenditures shall be 
reviewed and approved or disapproved by the Executive Committee before payment. The 
authority to approve or disapprove such expenditures shall be based on constitutional authority 
and/or a duly adopted General Council resolution or ordinance pursuant to the provisions of this 
Constitution. Subject to the limitations above, the Executive Committee shall render in writing 
such approval or disapproval that shall be maintained as a permanent part of the bookkeeping 
record. The Treasurer shall, upon receipt of written approval, be authorized to sign checks or 
otherwise make payment on behalf of the tribe. The Treasurer shall keep and maintain an accurate 
account of all receipts and disbursements and shall report the accurate amounts of each account to 
the Executive Committee at each regular meeting. The Treasurer shall submit financial reports 
and results of audits pursuant to the provisions in Article V. Such reports and audits shall be 
equivalent to National Accounting Association practices and standards. The Treasurer shall keep 
double-entry accounting records, which shall be fully implemented within one (1) year following 
the first election of officers under this Constitution. The financial records shall be maintained at 
the tribal headquarters. The Treasurer shall be bonded by a bona fide bonding company in any 
amount satisfactory to the Executive Committee and such bonding fees shall be paid from tribal 
funds or program funds if authorized by the funding agency.

SECTION 5. The Representative shall be a full voting member of the Executive Committee and 
shall perform such duties and responsibilities as may be delegated to him by the Executive 
Committee and/or the General Council.

SECTION 6. Judicial Branch Officials The duties of such officials shall be set forth in the 
Judicial Ordinance which shall be consistent with this Constitution. That ordinance shall include a 
provision for the Chief Justice to call and conduct any meeting or election that the Executive 
Committee or Election Commission has failed to call even though such meeting or election has 
been mandated by this Constitution or a valid petition, except as provided in Section 2, of Article 
XVI.

SECTION 7. Independent Commissions The duties of Election Commission officials shall be set 
forth in the Election Ordinance. Any future commissions, which may be established by 
referendum, shall be subject to a separate ordinance which shall be established pursuant to this 
Constitution and any limitations placed on it by the General Council within the scope of its stated 
purpose.

ARTICLE XIV – QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES

*(Amendment IV; ratified August 9, 1988: changes the terms “voter registration” and 
“registered voter” to “eligible voter” throughout the Constitution.)

SECTION 1. Before being declared a candidate for any elective office, each prospective 
candidate must show that the following qualifications have been met:

(a) An enrolled member of the tribe.

(b) An eligible voter for purposes of voting in tribal elections.

(c)  At least twenty-one (21) years of age on the date of the election for which he desires 
to be a candidate.

(d) Physically reside within the following Oklahoma counties: Cleveland, Pottawatomie, 
Oklahoma, McClain, Garvin, Pontotoc, Seminole, Lincoln, or Okfuskee.

(e) In cases where a prospective candidate has been convicted of a felony, such person shall 
not be eligible for consideration as a candidate until at least five (5) years have passed 
following completion of the penalty for such conviction(s ).

(f) Not more than one (1) member of an immediate family shall be a candidate for election to 
the same tribal elective body. Provisions shall be set forth in the Election Ordinance to deal 
with such concept.

SECTION 2. Specific qualifications. in addition to those in Section 1, may be imposed if 
approved by tribal referendum.

SECTION 3. Appointments to fill vacancies, or for any other purpose, shall be filled by persons 
who meet the qualifications of this Article and any specific qualifications which may be imposed 
pursuant to Section 2 of this Article.
 
 

ARTICLE XV- INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS

 
 *(Amendment VII; ratified May 10, 2019; removed the roll of the Secretary of Interior in 
conducting tribal elections and in the approval of amendments to the Absentee Shawnee 
Tribal Constitution.)

Within ten (10) days following certification of results of each election it shall be the duty of the 
Election Commissioner to call and conduct a meeting of the newly elected persons for the 
purpose of installing the successful candidates in their respective offices and which shall include 
administering to each the oath of office, the content of which shall be set forth in the Election 
Ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. General Council Meetings shall be held semi-annually in April and October on 
dates to be set by the Executive Committee. Notices shall be posted at appropriate places at least 
fifteen (15) days prior to each General Council meeting.

SECTION 2. Special General Council Meetings may be called by the Governor and shall be 
called and conducted by him when directed to do so by a majority vote of a quorum of the 
Executive Committee. In the event he refuses to call a meeting when so directed, the highest 
ranking official who favors calling the meeting shall be empowered to exercise that authority.

SECTION 3. Executive Committee Meetings shall be held monthly at tribal headquarters on dates 
to be established by the Executive Committee by public notice. Written notification shall be 

provided to each Committee Member at least (5) days in advance. The Committee may hold 
meetings at another location provided all members are so advised in the advance notice.

SECTION 4. Special Meetings of the Executive Committee may be called by the Governor as 
necessary with advance individual written notice. Any three (3) members of the Executive 
Committee may call a special meeting of that body by presenting a written notice to all members 
of the Committee. If the Governor fails to attend, the highest ranking of those who called the 
meeting shall be empowered to conduct the meeting, provided a quorum is present.

SECTION 5. All meetings of each of the tribal elective bodies are closed to non-tribal members 
unless they are on official business with the tribe or are otherwise invited to attend by the 
respective body.

SECTION 6. Procedures for calling and conducting meetings of tribal elective bodies, other than 
the Executive Committee, shall be set forth by each such body in an appropriate resolution which 
shall be consistent with this Constitution.

SECTION 7. Except where otherwise provided in this Constitution, all meetings shall be 
conducted in accordance with adopted procedures.

SECTION 8. Legal notices shall be published in a local newspaper in the counties mentioned in 
Article XIV, Section 1(d).
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - QUORUM

 
 *(Amendment IV; ratified August 9, 1988; changes the terms "voter registration" and 
"registered voter" to "eligible voter" throughout the Constitution.)

SECTION 1. Executive Committee, Tribal Court. Appeals Court. and Election Commission 
Meetings. In any duly called meeting of the above elected bodies any three (3) members of that 
particular body shall constitute a quorum to transact business within the scope of authority of that 
body.

SECTION 2. General Council Meeting. Fifty (50) members of the General Council, who are 
eligible tribal voters, shall constitute a quorum to transact business at any duly called General 
Council Meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - TRIBAL LEGISLATION

 
 *(Amendment IV; ratified August 9, 1988; changes the terms "voter registration" and 
"registered voter" to "eligible voter" throughout the Constitution.)

The Executive Committee is the body primarily responsible for legislative functions. However, 
the General Council, by means of referendum, initiative, or in meetings of that body, has reserved 
to itself certain legislative authorities. Enactments of the General Council shall, in most cases, be 
set forth in ordinances. The Executive Committee, in implementing such ordinances, or in 
executing its legislative function, shall adopt resolutions. Recognizing that there are certain 

actions or expressions each governing entity will make which do not specifically constitute tribal 
legislation, they shall be set forth in motions. A motion is an expression initiated in a General 
Council meeting by any eligible tribal voter or in meetings of the Executive Committee by a 
member of that body.

The forms of tribal legislation are defined as follows:

Resolution. A formal written expression of opinion or will. Resolutions are subordinate to and 
must be consistent with Tribal Ordinances and terms of this Constitution. Resolutions shall be 
used as necessary to set forth rules, regulations, and procedures for the purpose of implementing 
the intent of Tribal Ordinances.

Ordinance. An enactment of the General Council at a tribal referendum; a separate document 
which shall have long-range effect, such as, establishing procedures governing: the conduct of 
elections, removing elected officials or the manner of enrolling tribal members. Ordinances are 
tribal laws which shall have general application and shall remain in effect until amended or 
rescinded in the same manner in which they were enacted. Ordinances shall not conflict with this 
Constitution. In the event a subsequent constitutional amendment is enacted that would conflict 
with an ordinance, that ordinance, or conflicting portion thereof, shall be null and void.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX- RATIFICATION

 
 This Constitution shall be effective when approved by the Secretary of the Interior, or his 
authorized representative, and ratified by a majority of the General Council of the tribe voting in 
an election authorized by the Secretary of the Interior and conducted under regulations 
promulgated pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 stat. 
1967).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Acting Deputy, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967, as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve the Constitution of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians 
of Oklahoma: provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action 
under the Constitution that would be contrary to Federal Law.

Washington, D.C.

(SGD) Theodore Krenzke

Date: February 4, 1977

Acting Deputy Commissioner 

of Indian Affairs
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved February 4. 1977, by the Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, the foregoing Constitution of the Absentee Shawnee Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma was 
submitted for ratification to the adult members of the Absentee. Shawnee Tribe of Indians of 
Oklahoma and was on June 4, 1977, duly ratified by a vote of 95 for, and 77 against, in an 
election in which a majority of the 172 qualified voters cast their ballots in accordance with 
Article X of the tribe's constitution and Section 3 of the Act of June 26, 1936 ( 40 Stat. 1967).

(SGD) John E. Taylor
Chairman, Election Board

(SGD) Esteline S. Schulenberg
Election Board Member 

(SGD) Wallace C. Tyner 
Election Board Member

DATE: June 4, 1977

