 
  
 ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION  
 
OF THE
AK-CHIN INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 (Including Amendments)

WHEREAS, The Ak-Chin Indian Community is an unorganized group of 

Papago Indians living on the Maricopa, Ak-Chin Indian 
Reservation in Pinal County, State of Arizona, hereinafter 
referred to as the "Community", and

WHEREAS, The Community has no Constitution and By-Laws under which 

it operates, and

WHEREAS, The Community has conducted its business affairs by voice 

of the entire Community through an elected Chairman and 
a Secretary, and

WHEREAS, The Community now desires to organize under Articles of 

Association with a duly elected governing body (Community 
Council) consisting of five members who will have the 
specific duties hereinafter enumerated and that the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs and others shall recognize the Community 
Council's authority to act and speak for and on behalf of 
the Community.

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED THAT the Ak-Chin Indian Community, 

subject to the approval of the -Secretary of the Interior, 
do hereby adopt the following Articles of Association.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERMS

 
 Section 1. For the convenience of brevity and unless otherwise 
specified, the following terms will be construed to have the mean
ing set forth in this section:

(a)  Community - Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(b)  Council - Ak-Chin Indian Community Council.
(c)  Reservation - Maricopa, Ak-Chin Indian Reservation, Arizona.
(d)  Secretary of the Interior - The Secretary of the Interior 
or his duly authorized representative.
(e)  Superintendent - Superintendent of Pima Agency, Sacaton, 
Arizona, under which the Reservation is placed for administrative 
purposes, or his successor.

(f)  Chairman - Chairman of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(g)  Vice-Chairman - Vice-Chairman of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(h)  Treasurer - Treasurer of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(i)  Secretary - Secretary of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(j)  Councilman - Male (or Female) member of the Ak-Chin Indian 
Community elected to the Council.
(k)  He (he or she) -Wherever used the masculine shall include 
the feminine.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Community shall extend to all lands now comprised 
within the Maricopa, Ak-Chin Indian Reservation and to such other lands 
as may hereafter be acquired for the use and benefit of the Community.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Ak-Chin Indian Community shall be 
determined as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll as of January 1, 1940, except those 
individuals designated with the letters N E (Not Enrolled) 
and those individuals who have relinquished membership or 
have become enrolled as members of some other tribe or band,

(b)  All children of 1/4 or more degree Indian blood born 
after January 1, 1940, to members of the Ak-Chin Indian  
Community.

(c)Adoption into the Community of any person of Indian blood 
who does not meet the requirements in this Article shall 
be accomplished by the majority vote of the qualified voters 
of  the Community, voting at an election called for that 
purpose  by the Community Council or upon presentation of 

a petition  for the meeting signed by one-fourth of the qualified 
voters, members of the Ak-Chin Indian Community. Such 
adoptions  shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior or  his authorized representative.

(d)  Any person of at least 1/4 degree Indian blood may be 
adopted into the Ak-Chin Indian Community as long as he is legally 
adopted by a member or members of the Ak-Chin Indian Community. 
Such adoptions shall be accomplished by the majority vote of 
the Ak-Chin Indian Community Council, subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(e)  Corrections may be made to the roll any time by the 
Community Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior.

(f)  Any person rejected for enrollment as a member of the 
Ak-Chin Indian Community, except those persons rejected under 
subsection (c) of this section, shall have the right to appeal 
from that decision to the Secretary of the Interior and the 
decision of the Secretary shall be final. All appeals must 
be filed in accordance with the procedures set out in 25 CFR 42.

(g)  The enrollment records shall be kept current by the 
Community Council who shall remove therefrom the names of persons 
who die or relinquish membership in the Community and by adding 
thereto the names of persons who qualify for membership.

(h) The Community council shall have the authority to prescribe 
rules to followed in compiling a membership roll, the com
pleted roll to be approved by the Community Council. In the 
event the roll is used as the basis for distributing  tribal 
assets, it shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior 
for approval.

(Article III, amended in its entirety by Amendment approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior October 5, 1966.)
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Community shall be known as the 
Ak-Chin Indian Community Council and shall consist of a Chairman, Vice- 
Chairman, and three council members who shall be elected by the qualified 
voters of the Community. Three (3) members of the Council shall con
stitute a quorum.

Sec. 2. The first election of Council members under these Articles 
of Association shall be held within ninety (90) days following the 
adoption and approval of the Articles of Association.

In the first election the two (2) candidates receiving the highest 
number of votes shall hold office for a period of three (3) years. 
The next two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall 
hold office for a period of two (2) years. The candidate receiving 
the fifth highest number of votes shall hold office for a period of 
one (1) year, thereafter, Council members shall serve for three years, 
one member to be elected at the end of the first year, two members 
to be elected at the end of the second, and two members at the end 
of the third year.

Sec. 3. The Council Chairman and the Vice-Chairman shall be 
selected by the Council members out of the Council membership 
at the first Council meeting following the Council election for 
terms of one (1) year. These officers may be selected for successive 
terms.

Sec. 4. The Council may choose the Secretary and Treasurer, from 
within, or without, the Council or the Community membership.

(Article IV, Sec. 3, amended by Amendment III approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior September 9, 1969.)
 
 

ARTICLE V - QUALIFICATION OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. No person shall be elected or hold the office of Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman, or Councilman unless he:

(1) 

Is a member of the Community.

(2)  Has reached the age of twenty-five (25), has been living 

on the reservation for at least one year preceding the election. 
Additional qualifications may be prescribed by ordinance enacted 
by the council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Any member of the Community twenty-one years of age, 
or over shall be entitled to vote.

Sec. 2. The Council shall prescribe election regulations with respect 
to the dates thereof, polling places, election committees and their 
duties, absentee balloting, and any other requirements thereof.
 
 

ARTICLE VII  - VACANCY

 
 Section 1. The Council shall declare that a vacancy exists when any 
officer or member of the Council shall die, become insane, resign, or 
be removed from office for neglect of duty or gross misconduct, is 
permanently leaving the Community, or shall be found guilty of a felony 
or misdemeanor involving dishonesty in any Indian, County, State or 
Federal Court,

Sec. 2. The Council by affirmative vote of three (3) members may expel 
any member for neglect of duty, or gross misconduct in office, but 
before any vote for expulsion is taken, such member shall be given 
a fair opportunity to answer any, or all, charges. The decision of 
the Council shall be final.

Sec. 3. Should a vacancy exist in the office of the Chairman, the 
Vice-Chairman shall immediately succeed to the office of the Chair
man, and the office of Vice-Chairman shall thereupon be vacant.

Sec. 4. Should a vacancy exist in the office of the Vice-Chairman, 
or Councilman, a successor shall be elected at a special election 
called by the Council within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs. 
Should a vacancy occur within six (6) months, or less, of a regular 
scheduled election the Council may waive the special election and allow 
the vacancy to exist until the successor is elected at the regular 
scheduled election.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS OF THE COMMUNITY COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Council shall exercise the following powers subject to 
any limitations imposed by applicable statutes of the United States 
and the regulations of the Secretary of the Interior made pursuant 
thereto.

(a)  To represent the Community in negotiations with Federal, 
State, and local governments and other corporations, associations, 
partnerships, or individuals and to cooperate with the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, Department of Public Health, and various 
departments and agencies of the State of Arizona in matters of 
welfare, education, recreation, and social services.

(b)  To appoint subordinate officials, committees, and boards 
and to prescribe their duties and powers.

(c)  To promote and protect the health, peace, morals, education, 
and general welfare of the Community and its members.

(d)  To administer all Community property,

(e)  To prepare and adopt budgets subject to approval by the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(f)  To expend money in conformance with an adopted budget.

(g)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of the counsel and 
fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior.

(h)  To make assignments of Community land property and the 
improvements thereon.

(i)  To regulate inheritance assignments.

(j)  To assess fees on Community members for public purposes, 
or to finance any project or enterprise which it deems beneficial 
to the interests of the Community as a whole.

(k)  To provide by ordinance regulations for removal or exclusion 
from the Reservation non-members whose presence may be injurious 
to the peace, health, or welfare of the Community. Such ordinances 
shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(1)  To determine its own rules of procedures.

(m)  To take such actions as are necessary to carry into effect 
any of the foregoing powers or duties.

(n)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, use or encumbrance 
of Community assets.

(o)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior on all activities 
that may affect the Ak-Chin Indian Community, and on all appro
priation estimates and Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Community before such estimates and projects are submitted to 
the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress,

Sec. 2. Manner of Review. Any ordinance or resolution which, by 
the terms of these Articles of Association, is subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Super
intendent of the Pima Agency, who shall, within ten days after its 
receipt, approve or disapprove the same. If the Superintendent shall 
approve said ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become 
effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, 
bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, 
within 90 days from the date of its receipt by him, rescind the said 
ordinance or resolution for any cause by notifying the Council of such 
decision. If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance 
or resolution within 10 days after its receipt, he shall advise the 
Council of his reasons therefor in writing. If these reasons appear 
to the Council insufficient, it may, by a majority vote refer the 
ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may 
within 90 days from the date of its receipt by him, approve the same 
in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become 
effective.

(Article VIII, Sec. 2, amended by Amendment II approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior October 5, 1966.)
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1, These Articles of Association may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Community voting 
at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior, provided that at least thirty (30) percent of those 
entitled to vote shall vote in such an election, but no amend
ment shall become effective until it shall have been approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call 
an election on any proposed amendment at the request of the 
Community Council, or upon receipt of a petition signed by at 
least thirty (30) percent of the qualified voters of the Community,
 
 

ARTICLE X  - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Ak-Chin Indian Community shall 
enjoy equal rights of life, liberty, industrial pursuits, and 
the economic resources and activities of the community.

Sec. 2. The Community in exercising its powers of self-govern
ment shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise 
of religion, or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the 
press, or the right of the people peaceably to assembly and 
to petition for a redress of grievances;

(b)  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their 
persons, houses, papers and effects against unreasonable 
search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon probable 
cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched and the person or thing 
to be seized;

(c)  Subject any person for the same offense to be twice 
put in jeopardy;

(d)  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness 
against himself;

(e)  Take any private property for a public use without 
just compensation;

(f)  Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to 
a speedy and public trial, to be informed of the nature and 
cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses 
against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses 
in his favor, and at his own expense to have the assistance of 
counsel for his defense;

(g)  Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel 
and unusual punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of 
any one offense any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment 
for a term of six months or a fine of $500 or both;

(h)  Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal pro
tection of its laws or deprive any person of liberty or property 
without due process of law;

(i)  Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or

(j)  Deny to any person accused to an offense punishable by 
imprisonment the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of 
not less than six persons.

Sec. 3. The enumeration of certain rights in this articles of 
association shall not be construed to deny or disparage others 
retained by members of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.

(Article X added by Amendment IV, approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior September 9, 1969.)

BY-LAWS OF THE AK.-CHIN INDIAN COMMUNITY

Section 1. Each elected and each appointed officer shall have such 
powers and perform such duties as are prescribed, by the Articles of 
Association, or by Community ordinances, of the Council.

Sec. II. The Chairman shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the 
Community.

Sec. III. The Vice-Chairman shall assist the Chairman when called 
upon to do so, and shall function as Chairman in his absence.

Sec. IV. The Secretary shall be the official custodian of all files, 
records, and correspondence of the Community and of the Community seal. 
He shall prepare all minutes, resolutions, and ordinances enacted by 
the Council and transmit required copies to the Superintendent.

Sec. V. The Treasurer shall accept, receive, give receipt for and 
safeguard all funds of the Community. As directed by the Council, 
he shall deposit all funds, without limitation on the amount in any 
account, in any national or state bank whose deposits are insured 
by any agency of the Federal Government; or deposit funds with 
bonded disbursing officer of the United States. All deposits shall 
be made in the name of the Ak-Chin Indian Community. The Council 
may require deposits in banks to be collateralized. He shall not 
pay or disburse any funds of the Community except when properly 
authorized to do so by the Council. At the second regular Council 
meeting each month he shall submit a written report of receipts, 
disbursements, and the balance in each separate account for the 
preceding calendar month.

He may designate a duly bonded agent to perform any of his duties 
under his direction. Executed copy of such designation must be 
filed with the Secretary.

TThe books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least 
once a year and at such other times as the Council may direct, by 
a firm of certified public accountants employed by the Council. 
The Treasurer and all others handling Community funds shall be 
bonded by a corporate surety on the list approved by the United 
States Treasury Department, in an amount satisfactory to the 
Council and approved by the Secretary of the Interior. The Council 
may authorize a blanket bond.

Sec, VI, A duly elected Councilman shall not lose his right to vote 
at Council meetings because of membership on any committee.

Sec. VII. Each officer, committeeman or other person appointed, 
assigned, or serving in any capacity for the Council shall at the 
end of his service in office turn over all-correspondence, books, 
records, and documents to the Secretary.

Sec. VIII. The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the 
first and third Wednesday of each month unless otherwise designated 
by the Council.

Sec. IX. Special Council meetings may be held at such time and place 
as:

(a)  The Council may designate.
(b)  The Chairman may by call designate.
(c)  Written application of three or more members of the Council 
may designate.

The Secretary shall give notice of such meetings to the Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman, and all councilmen.

Sec. X. Each duly elected, or appointed, officer shall, before 
assuming the duties of his office, be given or subscribe to the 
following oath of office:

"I,________________________________________ , do solemnly swear that
I will support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States against all enemies; that I will faithfully and 
impartially carry out the duties of my office to the best 
of my ability; that I will promote and protect the best 
interest of the Ak-Chin Community in accordance with its 
Articles of Association, so help me God."
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
 
 of the 
 
AK CHIN INDIAN COMMUNITY

AMENDMENT III

 
 Section 3 of Article IV, Governing Body, shall be amended in its 
entirety to read as follows:

Section 3. The council chairman and the vice 
chairman shall be selected by the council 
members out of the council membership at the 
first council meeting following the council 
election for terms of one (1) year. These 
officers may be selected for successive terms.

CERTIFICATE fiF RESULTS OF ELECTION

Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Assistant Commissioner

of Indian Affairs on May 15, 1969, under delegated authority,

the attached Amendment III to the Articles of Association of the

Ak Chin Indian Community, was submitted to the qualified voters of

the tribe and was on May 2, 1969, duly adopted by a vote of

51 for, and 10 against, in an election in which at

rejected

least 30 percent of the 81 entitled to vote cast their 

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization

(number)

Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of

June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

Election Board Member
 
 

AMENDMENT
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
OF THE
AK-CHIN INDIAN COMMUNITY

AMENDMENT IV

 
 Article X, Rights of Members. shall be added to the Articles of 
Association. The new article shall read as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Ak Chin Indian Community shall enjoy 
equal rights to life, liberty, industrial pursuits, and the economic 
resources and activities of the community.

Sec. 2. The community in exercising its powers of self-government 
shall not:

(a). Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free 
exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of 
 speech, or of the press, or the right of the people 
peaceably to assembly and to petition for a redress 
of grievances:

(b). Violate the right of the people to be secure in 
their persons, houses, papers and effects against 
unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, 
but upon probable cause, supported by oath or 
affirmation, and particularly describing the place 
to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

(c). Subject any person for the same offense to be 
twice put in jeopardy;

(d). Compel any person in any criminal case to be a 
witness against himself:

(e). Take any private property for a public use without 
just compensation:

(f). Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the 
right to a speedy and public trial, to be informed of 
the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted 
with the witnesses against him, to have compulsory process 
for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and at his own 
expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

(g). Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, 
inflict cruel and unusual punishments, and in no 
event impose for conviction of any one offense any 
penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for 
a term of six months or a fine of $500 or both;

(h). Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the 
equal protection of its laws or deprive any person 
of liberty or property without due process of law;

(i). Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or

(j). Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable 
by imprisonment the right, upon request, to a trial by 
jury of not less than six persons.

Sec. 3. The enumeration of certain rights in this articles of 
association shall not be construed to deny or disparage others 
retained by members of the Ak Chin Indian Community.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Asst. Commissioner 

of Indian Affairs on May 15, 1969, under delegated authority, 

the attached Amendment IV to the Articles of Association of the

Ak Chin Indian Community, was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the tribe and was on Aug 2, 1969, duly adopted by a vote of

rejected

55 for, and 7 against, in an election in which at

least 30 percent of the 81 entitled to vote cast their 

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization

(number)

Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of

June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Election Board Member

Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Harrison Loesch , Assistant Secretary of the interior

of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 

tone by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 

approve the attached Amendments III and IV to the Articles of Association 

of Ak Chin Indian Community,

Approval Recommended: Sep. 4, 1969

J. L. NORWOOD

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs
 
  
 

HARRISON LOESCH

 
 Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C.

Date: Sep. 4, 1969 
 

AMENDMENT 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 

 
  
 of the 
 
AK-CHIN INDIAN COMMUNITY

AMENDMENT V

 
 Section 1 of Article VI, ELECTIONS, shall be amended in its entirety 

to read as follows:

Section 1. Any member of the Community eighteen (18) years of age, 
or over, shall be entitled to vote.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 authorized by Louis R. Burce, Commissioner of Indian Affairs 

Pursuant to an election 

on March 17, 1971 under delegated authority, the attached 

Amendment V to the Articles of Association of the Ak-Chin 

Indian Community, was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the community and was on May 8, 1971, duly adopted by a 

vote of rejected 35 for, and 17 against, in an election in which at 

least 30 percent of the 81 (number) entitled to vote cast their 

ballots in 

accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 

of  June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 

June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

I, 

 
 Harrison Loesch Assistant Secretary of the 

Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority 

granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, 

do hereby approved the attached Amendment V to the Articles of 

Association of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.

Approval Recommended:

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

(sgd) Harrison Loesch

Assistant Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C.

Date: JUN 21 1971
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
 
 of the 
 
AK-CHIN INDIAN COMMUNITY

AMENDMENT VI

 
 Section 1 (c) of Article III, MEMBERSHIP, shall be amended in its 
entirety to read as follows:

(c) Any person of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Indian 

blood who is legally married to a member of the Ak-Chin 
Indian Community may be adopted as a member of the 
community, provided, that such a person has resided on 
the Maricopa, Ak-Chin Indian Reservation for a period of 
twenty (20) years and is not enrolled elsewhere as a 
member of another Indian community, tribe or band. Such 
adoption shall be accomplished by a majority vote of the 
qualified voters, members of the Ak-Chin Indian Community, 
and shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior or his authorized representative.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by  Acting Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs on August 8, 1972, under delegated authority, the attached 

Amendment VI to the Articles of Association of the Ak-Chin 

Indian Community, was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the community and was on November 8, 1972 duly adopted by a 

vote of rejected 35 for, and 2 against, in an election in which at 

least 30 percent of the 112 (number) entitled to vote cast their ballots in 

accordance 

with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of  June 18, 1934 

(48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

PW-E/.'J OF KiDiAN AFFAIRS 
 
  
  
 
RECEIVED

 
 KOV 2 7 1272 
 

RHCEUIX

APPROVAL

I, 

 
 Richard R. Hite,  Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended, do hereby approved the attached Amendment VI to the Articles of Association of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.Approval Recommended:Raymond V. ButlerActing Director of Community Services

(sgd) Richard R. HiteDeputy Assistant Secretary of the Interior

Wash. D.C.Date: JAN 1 0 1973

United States Department of the Interior

IN REPLY REFER TO:
Tribal Operations 
(602) 261-4112
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

PHOENIX AREA OFFICE

 
 P.O. Box 7007 

Phoenix, Arizon* 85011

NOV 2 0 1978

Memorandum

To: 

Superintendent, Pima  Agency

From: 

Area Director

Subject: Approval of Results of Secretarial Election - Ak-Chin

Indian Community

We acknowledge receipt of the results of election held on
November 17, 1978, to amend the Articles of Association of the Ak-Chin 
Indian Community.

The election was held in accordance with the Area Director's authoriza
tion of September 14, 1978, which permitted the qualified voters of the 
Community to adopt or reject the proposed amendment.

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, signed by the 
election board members, the proposed amendment was duly adopted by the 
voters.

Amendment VII to the Articles of Association of the Ak-Chin Indian 
Community is hereby approved pursuant to the authority delegated to the 
Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs by 230 D.M. 1.1, and redelegated 
to me by 10 BIAM 3, and returned for delivery to the Community.
 
 

(SGD) JOHN ARTICHOKER, JR

 
 Area Director

Enclosure 

cc: Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Attention: Director. Office of Indian Services
 
 

 
 
AMENDMENT 
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
OF THE
AK-CHIN INDIAN COWUNITY

AMENDMENT VII

 
 Article III, Membership, shall be amended as follows:

Subsection (h) of Section 1 shall be amended in its entirety,

(h) The Community Council shall have authority to prescribe rules 

in accordance with this Article governing future membership, 
enrollment, relinquishment and loss of membership.

A new section, Section 2 shall be added,

Section 2.

(a)  Membership in the Ak-Chin Indian Community shall be lost 

or relinquished if any enrolled member accepts membership 
in another Indian community, tribe, or band.

(b)  The Community Council shall not enroll as a member of the 

Ak-Chin Indian Community, under this Article, any person 
already enrolled elsewhere under some other Indian 
community, tribe, or band.

(c)  No person shall be eligible for enrollment as a member of 

the Ak-Chin Indian Community unless he is a citizen of the 
United States of America.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by  the Phoenix Area Office 

on September 14, 1978, the attached Amendment VII to 

the Articles of  Association of the Ak-Chin Indian Community, 

was submitted to the  qualified voters of the community and 

was on November 17, 1978 duly  adopted by a vote of 51 for, 

and 8 against, in  rejected an election in which at least 30 percent of 

entitled  to vote cast their ballots in  accordance with Section 16 of 

the 98 (number) 

the  Indian Reorganization Act of  June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended  by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, John Artichoker, Jr., Area Director, Phoenix Area Office, 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 

Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended, and delegated to the Assistant Secretary for Indian 

Affairs by 230 D.M. 1.1, and redelegated to me by 10 BIAM 3, do hereby 

approve Amendment VII to the Articles of Association of the Ak-Chin 

Indian Community.

Phoenix, Arizona

Date: NOV 21 1978

Area Director

