 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF AK-CHIN (PAPAGO)  
 
INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 Approved December 20, 1961

"ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION"

WHEREAS The Ak-Chin Indian Community is an un-organized group of Papago Indians living on 
the Maricopa (Ak-Chin) Indian Reservation in Pinal County, State of Arizona, hereinafter referred to as 
the "Community", and

WHEREAS The Community has no Constitution and By Laws under which it operates, and

WHEREAS The Community has conducted its business affairs by voice of the entire Community 

through an elected Chairman and Secretary, and

WHEREAS The Community now desires to organize under Articles of Association with a duly 
elected governing body (Community Council) consisting of five members who will have the specific 
powers and duties hereinafter enumerated and that the Bureau of Indian Affairs and other shall 
recognize the Community Council’s authority to act and speak for itself and on behalf of the Community.

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED the Ak-Chin Indian Community, subject to the approval of the 

Secretary of the Interior, do hereby adopt the following Articles of Association.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERMS

 
 SECTION 1. For the convenience of brevity and unless otherwise specified, the following terms 

will be construed to have the meanings set forth in this section:
(A)  Community - Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(B)  Council - Ak-Chin Indian Community Council.
(C)  Reservation - Maricopa (Ak-Chin) Indian Reservation, Arizona.
(D)  Secretary of the Interior - The Secretary of the Interior or his duly authorized 

representative.

(E)  Superintendent - Superintendent of the Pima Agency, Sacaton, Arizona, under which the 

Reservation is placed for administrative purposes, or his successor.

(F)  Chairman - Chairman of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(G)  Vice Chairman - Vice Chairman of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(H)  Treasurer - Treasurer of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(I)  Secretary - Secretary of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(J)  Councilman - Male (or Female) member of the Ak-Chin Indian Community.
(K)  He (he or she) -- Wherever used the masculine shall include the feminine.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the community shall extend to all lands now comprised within the Maricopa (Ak-Chin) 
Indian Reservation and to such other lands may hereafter be acquired.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1.  The membership of the committee shall be determined as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census rolls as of June 30, 
1928; provided, that within five years after the adoption and approval of these Articles of 
Association, corrections may be made in said roll by the Community Council, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  After the approval of these Articles of Association by the Secretary of the Interior, all 

children of members wherever born shall be entitled to membership in the Community if 
they are at least one-fourth (1/4th) degree Indian blood.

(c)  The Council shall have the power to enact ordinances, subject to the approval of the 

Secretary of the Interior, governing future membership, and the adoption of members of 
the Community.
 
 

ARTICE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 SECTION 1. The governing body of the Community shall be known as the Ak-Chin Indian 

Community Council and shall consist of a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and three Council members who 
shall be elected by the qualified voters of the Community. Three members of the Council shall constitute 
a quorum.

SECTION 2. The first election of Council members under these Articles of Association shall be 

held within 90 days following the adoption and approval of the Articles of Association.

In the first election the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office 
for a period of three years. The next two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall hold 
office for a period of two years. The candidate receiving the fifth highest number of votes shall hold 
office for a period of one year, thereafter; Council member shall serve for three years, one member to 
be elected at the end of the first year, two members to be elected at the end of the second, and two 
members at the end of the third year.

SECTION 3. The Council Chairman, and Vice Chairman, shall be elected from the Council 
membership by the qualified voters of the Community for a period of one year. The Chairman and Vice 
Chairman shall be elected immediately following the election of the Council members. Only Council 
members are eligible for these offices. The Chairman, or Vice Chairman, may be reelected for successive 
terms.

SECTION 4. The Council may choose the Secretary and Treasurer, from within, or without, the 

Council or the Community membership.
 
 

ARTICLE V - QUALIFICATION OF OFFICERS

 
 SECTION 1. No person shall be elected or hold the office of Chairman, Vice Chairman, or 

Councilman unless he:

(1)  Is a member of the Community.

(2)  Has reached the age of 25 years, has been living on the reservation for at least one year 

preceding the election. Additional qualifications may be prescribed by ordinance enacted by 
the Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 SECTION 1. Any member of the Community 21 years of age, or over, shall be entitled to vote.

SECTION 2. The Council shall prescribe election regulations with respect to the dates thereof, 
polling places, election committees and their duties, absentee balloting, and any other requirements 
thereof.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VACANCY

 
 SECTION 1. The Council shall declare that a vacancy exists when any officer or member of the 

Council shall die, become insane, resign, or be removed from office for neglect of duty or gross 
misconduct, or permanently leaving the Community, or shall be found guilty of a felony or misdemeanor 
involving dishonesty in any Indian, County, State, or Federal Court.

SECTION 2. The Council by affirmative vote of three members may expel any member for 
neglect of duty, or gross misconduct in office, but, before any vote for expulsion is taken, such member 
shall be given a fair opportunity to answer any, or all, charges. The decision of the Council shall be final.

SECTION 3. Should a vacancy exist in the Office of the Chairman, the Vice Chairman shall 
immediately succeed to the Office of the Chairman, and the Office of the Vice Chairman shall thereupon 
be vacant.

SECTION 4. Should a vacancy exist in the Office of the Vice Chairman, or Councilman, a successor 

shall be elected at a special election called by the Council within 60 days after the vacancy occurs. 
Should a vacancy occur within six months, or less, of a regular scheduled election the Council may waive 
the special election and allow the vacancy to exist until the successor is elected at the regular scheduled 
election.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS OF THE COMMUNITY COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. The Council shall exercise the following powers subject to any limitations imposed 

by applicable statutes of the United States and the regulations of the Secretary of the Interior made 
pursuant thereto.

(a)  To represent the Community in negotiations with Federal, State, and local governments and 
other corporations, associations, partnerships, or individuals and cooperate with the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, Department of Public Health, and various departments and agencies of the 
State of Arizona in matters of welfare, education, recreation, and social services.

(b)  To appoint subordinate officials, committees, and boards and to prescribe their duties and 

powers.

(c)  To promote and protect the health, peace, morals, education, and general welfare of the 

Community and its members.

(d)  To administer all Community property.

(e)  To prepare and adopt budget subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior.
(f)  To expend money in conformance with adopted budget.
(g)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of the Council and fixing of fees to be subject to the 

approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(h)  To make assignments of Community land property and the improvements thereon.
(i)  To regulate inheritance of assignments.
(j)  To assess fees on Community members for public purposes or to finance any project or 
enterprise which it deems beneficial to the interests of the community as a whole.
(k)  To provide by ordinance regulations for removal or exclusion from the Reservation non- 
members whose presence may be injurious to the peace, health, or welfare of the 
Community. Such ordinances shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(l)  To determine its own rules of procedures.
(m) To take such actions as are necessary to carry into effect any of the foregoing powers or 

duties.

(n)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, use or encumbrance of Community Assets.
(o)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior on all activities that may affect the Ak-Chin Indian 
Community and on all appropriation estimates and Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Community before such estimates and projects are submitted to the Bureau of the Budget 
and to Congress.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. These Articles of Association may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified 

voters of the Community voting at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least 30% of those entitled to vote shall vote in such an election, but no amendment 
shall become effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed 
Amendment at the request of the Community Council, or upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 
30% of the qualified voters of the Community.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE AK-CHIN INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 SECTION I. Each elected and each appointed officer shall have such powers and perform such 

duties as are prescribed by the Articles of the Association, or by Community Ordinances, of the Council.

SECTION II. The Chairman shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Community.

SECTION III. The Vice Chairman shall assist the Chairman when called upon to do so, and shall 

function as Chairman in his absence.

SECTION IV. The Secretary shall be the official Custodian of all files, records, and correspondence 
of the Community and of the Community Seal. He shall prepare all minutes, resolutions, and ordinances 
enacted by the Council and transmit required copies to the Superintendent.

SECTION 5. The Treasurer shall accept, receive, give receipt for and safeguard all funds of the 
Community. As directed by the Council, he shall deposit all funds, without limitation on the amount in 

any account, in any national or state bank whose deposits are insured by any agency of the Federal 
Government; or deposit funds with bonded disbursing officer of the United States. All deposit shall be 
made in the name of the Ak-Chin Indian Community. The Council may require deposits in banks to be 
collateralized. He shall not pay or disburse any funds of the Community except when properly 
authorized to do so by the Council. At the second regular Council meeting each month he shall submit a 
written report of receipts, disbursements, and the balance in each separate account for the preceding 
calendar month.

He may designate a duly bonded agent to perform any of his duties under his direction. 

Executed copy of such designation must be filed with the Secretary.

The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least once a year and at such other 
times as the Council may direct, by a firm of certified public accountants employed by the Council. The 
Treasurer and all others handling Community funds shall be bonded by a corporate surety on the list 
approved by the United States Treasury Department, in an amount satisfactory to the Council and 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior. The Council may authorize a blanket bond.

SECTION VI. A duly elected Councilman shall not lose his right to vote at Council meetings 

because of membership on any committee.

SECTION VII. Each officer, committeemen or other person appointed, signed or serving in any 
capacity for the Council shall at the end of his service in office turned over all correspondence, books, 
records, and documents to the Secretary.

SECTION VIII. The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first and third Wednesday 

of each month unless otherwise designated by the Council.

SECTION IX. Special Council Meetings may be held at such time and place as:

(a)  The Council may designate.
(b)  The Chairman may call designate.
(c)  Written application of three more members of the Council may designate.

The Secretary shall give notice of such meetings to the Chairman, Five Chairman, and all Councilmen.

SECTION X. Each duly elected, or appointed, officers shall before assuming the duties of his 

office be given or subscribe to the following oath of office:

"I, , do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United 

States against all enemies; that I will faithfully and impartially carry out the duties of my office to the 
best of my ability; that I will promote and protect the best interests of the Ak-Chin Indian Community in 
accordance with its Articles of Association, so help me God.”

Signature
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION

 
 pursuant to an order approved August 7, 1961, by the Assistant Sec. of the Interior, the attached 

Articles of Association of the Ak-Chin Indian Community of the Maricopa (Ak-Chin) Indian Reservation, 
Arizona, were submitted for ratification to the qualified voters of the reservation and were on 
September 16, duly adopted by a vote of 44 for and 8 against, in an election in which at least 30% of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1936, (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
  
  
 

RICHARD CARLYLE
 
 Chairman of the Election Board 
 

ROSS LOPEZ
 
 Secretary of the Election Board

MINTON J. NOLAN
Superintendent, Pima Agency
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, John A. Carver, Jr., Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America, by virtue 

of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the Articles of Association of the Maricopa, (Ak-Chin) Indian Community.

Approval recommended:
 
 

PHILLEO NASH 
 
 Commissioner
Bureau of Indian Affairs
Washington D.C.
Date: Dec. 20, 1961.

JOHN A. CARVER, JR.
(Assistant) Secretary of the Interior

[SEAL]

SECTION 1.  The membership of the Ak-Chin Indian Community shall be determined as follows:

AMENDMENT 1

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census roll as of January 1, 
1940, except those individuals designated with the letters N E (Not Enrolled) and of those 
individuals who have relinquished membership or have become and roles as members of 
some other tribe or band.

(b)  All children of 1/4th degree Indian blood born after January 1, 1940, to members of the Ak- 

Chin Indian Community.

(c)  Adoption into the Community of any person of Indian blood who does not meet the 

requirements in this Article shall be accomplished by the majority vote of the qualified 
voters of the Community, voting at an election called for that purpose by the Community 
Council or upon presentation of a petition for the meeting signed by one fourth of the 
qualified voters, members of the Ak-Chin Indian Community. Such adoptions shall be subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(d)  Any person of at least one fourth degree Indian blood may be adopted into the Ak-Chin 

Indian Community as long as he is legally adopted by a member or members of the Ak-Chin 
Indian Community. Such adoptions shall be accomplished by the majority vote of the Ak- 
Chin Indian Community Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or 
his authorized representative.

(e)  Corrections may be made to the roll any time by the Community Council, subject to the 

approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(f)  Any person rejected for enrollment as a member of the Ak-Chin Indian Community, except 
those persons rejected under Subsection (c) of this Section, shall have the right to appeal 
from that decision to the Secretary of the Interior and the decision of the Secretary is final. 
All appeals must be filed in accordance with the procedures set out in 25 CFR 42.

(g)  The enrollment records shall be kept current by the Community Council who shall remove 
there from the names of persons who die or relinquished membership in the Community 
and by adding thereto the names of the persons who qualify for membership.
(h)  The Community Council shall have the authority to prescribe rules to be followed in 

compiling a membership roll, the completed roll to be approved by the Community Council. 
In the event the roll is used as the basis for distributing tribal assets, it shall be submitted to 
the Secretary of the Interior for approval.
 
 

AMENDMENT II

 
 AMENDMENT II reads as follows:

ARTICLE VIII, Powers of the Community Council, shall be amended by adding thereto a new 

section, Section 2, Manner of Review.

SECTION 2.  Manner of Review. Any ordinance or resolution which, by the terms of these Articles 

of Association, is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior shall be presented to the 
Superintendent of the Pima Agency, whose shall, within 10 days after its receipt, approve or disapprove 
the same. If the Superintendent shall approve said ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become 

7

effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the 
Sec. of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of receipt by him, rescind the said ordinance 
or resolution for any cause by notifying the Council of such decision. If the Superintendent shall refuse 
to approve any ordinance or resolution within 10 days after its receipt, he shall advise the Council of his 
reasons therefor in writing. If these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by a majority vote, 
referrer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the 
date of its receipt by him, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall 
become effective.

Amendments I and II were approved October 5, 1966, by the Assistant Secretary of the Interior, 

Harry R. Anderson, at Washington, DC.

