and effect as heretofore, until repealed or amended to the extent and in the 
manner as the council shall deem lawful and proper.

Section 15. The present officers of the nation shall hold their office, respec
tively, until the first Tuesday of May, 1893, or until others are elected in their 
places in accordance with the terms of this constitution, and no longer, subject 
to be sooner removed by impeachment.

Section 16. This constitution may be altered or amended at any time the 
council see fit and necessary; and it shall be lawful for the council at their dis
cretion, by at least a quorum vote, to appoint a committee of three on revision 
of the constitution. The duty of the committee shall be, on ten days’ notice 
of their appointment to prepare amendment or alteration of the constitution, 
such as in their judgment is necessary and proper, and report the constitution 
as amended to the council, whereupon it shall be the duty of the council to 
submit the same to the electors of the nation for their approval or rejection, to 
be determined by a majority vote of the qualified electors at a meeting called 
by the council for that purpose on the Allegany and Cattaraugus reservations, 
respectively, such to be held on the same day. In case the amendments of the 
committee be rejected no action shall be taken by the council or the electors, 
relative to amending this constitution within one year from the date of said 
meeting and rejection.

Revised and done in pursuance to the resolution duly passed by the coun
cil of the Seneca Nation and voted on by the legal voters of the nation the 
thirteenth day of January, a.d. 1893, and carried.

Wallace Halftown, 
Chairman of the Committee. 
Harrison Halftown, 
D. E. Shongo, 
Committee.

46

Muskogee (Creek) Nation 
Constitution (Creek 
People, 1894)

Although the Muskogee had (as early as 1859) adopted a constitution 
that called for the election of a principal chief and an assistant princi
pal chief in the two established political districts, this document—at 
least initially—did not substantially interfere with the political auton
omy of the historically vital town governments.

In 1867 the Muskogee Nation adopted a new charter that was 
more clearly patterned after the U.S. Constitution, although the

Creek’s bicameral legislature was divided into a House of Warriors 
and a House of Kings. While some commentators have suggested that 
“the authority of the Creek constitution did not directly interfere with 
the existing village governments, others maintain that various Creek 
rebellions and internal conflicts were generated by the confrontation 
between the newly centralized Creek government and the preexisting 
talwa, or town governments.

This constitution would remain in effect until the early 1900s, 
when, as a result of the Curtis Act (28 Stat. 693), the courts and laws 
of the Five Civilized Tribes were essentially rendered ineffectual, 
although they were later reconstituted. Nevertheless, a strong reform 
movement arose in 1893 to make additional changes to the politi
cal system and to the constitution in particular. The plan to amend 
the constitution was approved in November 1893, and the new docu
ment was completed on January 17, 1894. Although adopted by the 
national council, the proposed constitution was never ratified by the 
Creek people and therefore never put into effect.

Creek constitutional government remained largely intact from 
1867 to 1907 because more traditional-minded Creek were denied 
opportunities to modify their nation’s government by a political and 
economic alliance between those Creek who were committed to consti
tutional-based government and U.S. officials.

The New Constitution of the Muscogee Nation: English and Indian (Eufaula, 
Indian Territory: Indian Journal Printing, 1894).

Muskogee Creek Nation Constitution

An Act

Authorizing the preparation and drafting of a new constitution for the Muskogee 
Nation.

Approved November 2d, 1893

Whereas, Several attempts have been made in the past few years to submit to 
a vote of the people at large, articles of amendment to the constitution of the 
Muskogee Nation, and

Whereas, All such attempts have so far failed to allow citizens at large an 

opportunity to express their wishes on the subject, and

Whereas, There is no provision in the constitution itself as to how the 
constitution shall be amended or a new one adopted, and on that account the 
citizens at large have accused the members of council of taking too much 
authority upon themselves by refusing to say whether or not the constitution 
shall be amended, and

Whereas, There are serious faults in the constitution which the interests of 
the people and the perpetuity of our government demand shall be remedied at 
once; therefore,

Be it Enacted by the National Council 
of the Muskogee Nation

Section 1. That all the male citizens of voting age of the several towns shall 
meet in their respective towns at the usual place of meeting on the 15th day 
of December 1893, and shall then and there proceed to elect two delegates to 
represent their town, and the delegates thus elected shall meet in Okmulgee, 
Muskogee Nation, on the 1st Tuesday in January, 1894, and then and there 
organize by electing a chairman from one of their number and a clerk and 
interpreter from the outside.

Section 2. The said delegation when thus organized shall proceed to 
prepare and draft a new constitution for the Muskogee Nation which when 
completed shall be submitted to the principal chief.

Section 3. When the principal chief shall receive the proposed new consti
tution, he shall have the same carefully translated and printed in both English 
and Creek and shall send a copy of each to every town chief and shall also 
order the town chief to call a meeting of all voters in their respective towns and 
to submit to them the new constitution for adoption or rejection by the popular 
vote. The town chiefs shall call the voters of their towns to meet on the second 
Tuesday in June, 1894, to vote on the said constitution. The principal chief 
shall furnish the necessary blanks and the votes shall be recorded in duplicate, 
one copy to be held by the town chief and the other to be furnished to the presi
dent of the house of kings and the president of the house of kings shall submit 
all such returns to the national council at its regular session in October, 1894.

Section 4. If the constitution as herein above provided for shall be ratified 
by a majority vote of the people then the principal chief shall promulgate the 
same by proclamation and thereupon it shall become and be the constitution of 
the Muskogee Nation; provided, however, that nothing herein contained shall 
be taken, construed or held to in any way to interfere with the present consti
tution and laws or any officers now in office until after the expiration of the 
present constitutional term of council, except, however, that the next general 
election for election of Principal Chief and Second Chief and members of the 
council shall be held in accordance with the new constitution.

Section 5. The said delegates shall each receive Two Dollars ($2.00) per 
day while in attendance at meeting, and mileage at the rate of ten (10) cents per 
mile in going to and returning from the capitol. The clerk and interpreter shall 
receive the same per diem and mileage as the delegates.

Section 6. The convention of the delegates herein provided for shall not sit 

longer than twenty days, exclusive of Sundays.

Section 7. That for the purpose of carrying this act into effect, there be 
and is hereby appropriated the sum of $5000, or so much thereof as may be 
necessary.

Approved November 2, 1893.

The New Constitution

Okmulgee, I. T., January 17th, 1894.
To the Hon. Chairman of the Constitutional Convention:

Sir—Your committee to whom was assigned the duty of preparing a con
stitution as contemplated in the accompanying act of the national council, 
approved November 2d, 1893, respectfully submit the following as a result of 
their deliberations and recommend its adoption and submission to the principal 
chief for his further action as provided in the act referred to.

Respectfully,

N. B. Childers, Chairman.
G. W. Grayson, Secretary.

Constitution of the Muskogee Nation

In order to establish justice, insure tranquility, promote the common welfare, 
and to secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of freedom:

We, the Muskogee people, gratefully acknowledging the goodness of the 
Supreme Ruler and source of all law in permitting us to choose our own form 
of government do ordain and establish this constitution for our government 
within the following limits, to-wit: All that country and territory embraced and 
described in a certain patent in fee-simple to the Muskogee Nation, executed 
in the city of Washington, D.C., dated August eleventh a.d. eighteen hundred 
and fifty-two, and signed by Millard Fillmore, then the President of the United 
States, which is therein granted and made over to the Muskogee Nation to 
belong to said nation as long as it shall exist as a nation, except all such por
tions thereof as have by the treaty made with the United States and proclaimed 
eleventh of August, eighteen hundred and sixty-six, and the agreement with 
said United States approved the thirty-first of January, a.d. eighteen hundred 
and eighty-nine, been ceded and relinquished to the said United States.

Article I

Section 1. The lands of the Muskogee Nation shall remain the common prop
erty of the recognized citizens thereof share and share alike; and the national 
council may by law prescribe such regulations for the individual use thereof 
as it shall deem wise and proper; provided always, that no law or laws shall be 
enacted individualizing the fee in the soil.

Article II

Section 1. The power of the Muskogee government shall be divided into three 
distinct departments—the Legislative, the Executive and the Judicial.

Article III

Section 1. The legislative power of this government shall be vested in a 
national council composed of two distinct branches—the House of Kings and 
the House of Warriors, the style of whose acts shall be—Be it enacted by the 
National Council of the Muskogee Nation.

Section 2. The House of Kings shall be composed of one member from 

each town or consolidation of kindred towns.

Section 3. The House of Warriors shall be composed of one member from 

each town or consolidation of kindred towns.

Section 4. Towns having a less number of legal voters than ten (10) shall 
not be entitled to individual representation in either branch of the national 
council, but may join with their kindred towns as they may elect and freely par
ticipate in all general elections submitted to the vote of the people, and every 
member of such union of towns shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges 
therein as are members of other towns.

Section 5. Each member of the national council shall be elected by the 
legal voters of the town or consolidation of towns which he represents under 
such regulations as may be prescribed by law, and shall hold his office for the 
term of four years.

Section 6. The members of the national council shall receive such com
pensation out of the national treasury as shall be prescribed by law, but not per 
diem or salary greater than four ($4.00) dollars or mileage greater than ten (10) 
cents per mile shall be paid to such members.

Section 7. A majority of the members of each house shall constitute a 
quorum; but a less number may adjourn from day to day and compel the pres
ence of absentees.

Section 8. Each house shall be the judge of the qualifications of its members 
and maintain order in its respective body according to such laws and regulations 
as shall by the joint action of both houses be prescribed for that purpose.
Section 9. The House of Warriors shall elect its own speaker.
Section 10. Each house shall choose its own secretaries whose terms of 
office shall continue at the discretion of the house which they serve, whose pay 
shall be provided by law.

Section 11. No person shall become a member of either house who shall 
not be an acknowledged citizen of the Muskogee nation and who shall not be 
attained to the age of twenty-two years.

Article IV

Section 1. The supreme executive power of this nation shall be vested in a prin
cipal chief who shall be styled “The Principal Chief of the Muskogee nation,” 
who shall be a native born citizen of this nation. He shall be elected for the 
term of four years by a plurality of the votes cast, of the recognized male 
citizens of this nation who shall have attained the age of eighteen years. There 
shall also be a second chief who shall be elected for the same term in the same 
manner as prescribed for the election of principal chief; and in case of the 
death, resignation or removal from the office of the principal chief, he shall 

perform all the duties of that officer. He shall also preside as the President of 
the House of Kings.

Section 2. No person shall be eligible to the office of principal or second 
chief of the Muskogee Nation who is not a recognized native born citizen of 
the same and who shall have attained the age of thirty years.

Section 3. The principal chief is hereby invested with the reprieving and 
pardoning power, but shall exercise the same only under and in accordance 
with such restrictions and regulations as shall be provided by law. He shall see 
that all the laws of the nation are faithfully executed and enforced; shall at each 
annual meeting of the national council, render an annual report thereto of the 
condition of the affairs in the nation; and shall recommend such measures as 
he may deem necessary for the welfare of the nation.

Section 4. Whenever any bill or measure shall pass both houses, it shall 
be submitted to the principal chief for his approval or rejection. If he shall 
approve, it shall become a law. If he shall object to it, he shall, within five 
(5) days return it, accompanied with his objections to the house in which it 
originated; and if not so returned within five (5) days it shall become a law. If 
after a bill or measure has been vetoed by the principal chief, it shall again be 
submitted to the two houses for reconsideration, and receive a favorable vote 
of two-thirds (2/3) of both houses it shall become a law.

Section 5. Whenever any bill or measure shall pass both houses and be 
submitted to the principal chief for his approval or rejection within five (5) 
days before the adjournment of the session of the national council, he shall be 
allowed the first three days of the next session of the council within which to 
return the same.

Section 6. The principal chief shall be allowed to select a private secre
tary who shall be compensated for his services out of the national treasury as 
provided by law.

Article V

Section 1. The supreme law-defining power of this nation is hereby lodged 
in a high court to be known as a Supreme Court, which shall be composed of 
five (5) competent recognized citizens of the Muskogee Nation who shall have 
attained the age of twenty-five (25) years. They shall be chosen by the national 
council for the term of four years, and be paid as shall be provided by law.

Section 2. This court shall meet on the first Tuesday in October of each 
year, and shall have power to try all cases where the issue is more than one 
hundred ($100.00) dollars. The presence of three (3) members shall constitute 
a quorum for business. This court shall have power to provide such rules and 
regulations for the government and maintenance of order and the dispatch of 
business within its body in accordance with such privileges and limits as the 
national council may provide by law.

Article VI

Section 1. The present division of the Muskogee Nation into six judicial 
districts, to-wit: Eufaula, Wewoka, Deep Fork, Okmulgee, Coweta, and 

Muskogee is hereby recognized and confirmed, and shall each be provided 
with one judge, one prosecuting attorney and one company of Lighthorsemen. 
The judge and prosecuting attorney of each district shall be elected by the 
national council by a plurality vote of the duly authorized members thereof, 
and shall each hold office for the term of two years. Lighthorse company 
shall be elected for the same term as the judge and prosecuting attorney, by a 
plurality vote of the legal voters of the nation resident in the district wherein 
the company is to serve.

Section 2. The district judge shall try and determine all causes civil and 
criminal arising within his district where the issue does not exceed one hun
dred dollars. He shall have the right to summon twenty-four disinterested men 
out of which number shall be selected, in criminal cases twelve, and in civil 
cases nine, who shall sit as jurors and whose pay shall be provided by law. He 
shall also be allowed a clerk who, together with himself shall be paid as shall 
be provided by law.

Section 3. Any person failing to obey a summons to serve as juror without 

good reason for such failure, shall be fined in the sum of five ($5.00) dollars.

Section 4. It shall be the duty of the prosecuting attorney to indict and 
prosecute all offenders against the laws of the nation found within his district, 
and for his services shall receive such pay as shall be provided by law.

Section 5. The Lighthorse company shall consist of a captain and four (4) 
privates who shall be subject to the orders of the district judge. Their duties and 
compensation shall be fixed by law.

Article VII

Section 1. There shall be a national treasurer who shall be elected at each gen
eral election by a plurality vote of the people for the term of four years. His 
duties shall be to receive, receipt for, and disburse all national funds as shall 
be directed and required by law. He shall report the amount of his receipts 
and disbursements at least once every year. He shall be required to execute 
such necessary bond for the faithful performance of his duties as shall be 
required by law, and shall receive such compensation as shall be provided by 
the national council.

Section 2. No moneys shall be drawn from the national treasury except to 

carry out appropriations made by the national council.

Article VIII

Section 1. There shall be a national auditor who shall be a bona fide citizen of 
this nation who shall be elected by a plurality vote of a people at each general 
election, who shall hold his office for the period of four (4) years.

Section 2. He shall keep account of the financial affairs of the nation and 
render a report of the same to each annual session of the national council. He 
shall have the issuance of all evidence of obligation of the nation in accordance 
with such laws as the national council may provide. He shall execute to the 
nation sufficient bond duly secured for the faithful performance of his duties as 

shall be required by law, and for his services receive such pay as the national 
council may provide.

General Provisions of the Constitution

Section 1. All recognized male citizens of sane mind and not physically dis
abled, who shall have attained the age of eighteen years shall be entitled to vote 
in all general elections of the nation.

Section 2. All officers of this government shall be subject to impeachment 

and removal from office.

Section 3. The impeachment of all officers of this government below the 
rank of principal chief shall be tried by the supreme court under such laws as 
shall be made for the regulation of impeachment proceedings.

Section 4. The impeachment of the principal chief shall originate in the 
House of Warriors, and tried by the House of Kings sitting as a high court for 
that purpose, in accordance with law.

Section 5. No law impairing the obligations of lawful contracts or laws 
taking effect upon things that occurred before the enactment of the law shall 
be passed.

Section 6. All persons shall be allowed the right of counsel; and all cases 
shall be tried according to the provisions of the laws under which they respec
tively originated.

Section 7. All treaties shall be made by delegates duly recommended by 
the Principal Chief and confirmed by the national council; and such treaties 
shall be subject to the ratification of the national council. But no treaty provid
ing for the sale of any portion of the lands or division thereof shall ever be 
made. All treaties shall be the supreme law of the land.

Section 8. No person for the same offense shall be twice put in jeopardy of 
life or limb; nor shall a person be again put upon trial for the same offense after 
a verdict of not guilty. And the right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate.

Section 9. No citizen shall ever be imprisoned for debt.
Section 10. All powers [that] are granted in the constitution shall be 

reserved to the people.

Section 11. The adoption or recognition of any person entitling him or her 
to the rights of a citizen of this nation shall not carry with it the right to any back, 
retrospective payment of moneys out of the treasury of the Muskogee Nation.

Section 12. The national council may propose such amendments to this 

constitution as two-thirds of each branch thereof may deem expedient.

Schedule

Section 1. After the ratification of this constitution all existing laws not in con
flict therewith shall remain in force until repealed or amended by the national 
council.

Section 2. The first general election under this constitution for principal 
and second chief, treasurer, auditor and members of the national council shall 

take place on the first Tuesday of September a.d. 1895, under such rules and 
regulations as have been, or may hereafter be provided by the national council.
Section 3. When the election of officers under this constitution shall be 
ascertained and proclaimed by the principal chief they shall assume and enter 
upon the duties of the respective offices to which they have each been elected; 
and the retiring incumbents shall vacate their offices, turning over and deliver
ing to the newly elected officers all moneys, books, records, papers or other 
properties belonging to the respective offices so vacated.

Section 4. The oath of office may be administered by any one of the retiring 

justices of the supreme court.

47 

Dew M. Wisdom, Agent, Union
Agency, Indian Territory 
(Cherokee, Choctaw, Chickasaw, 
and Other Nations, 1896)

In this section of his annual report, Agent Wisdom glowingly com
ments on recent electoral processes that had taken place among the 
Choctaw and the Chickasaw. Those two nations had installed as chief 
executives two men who represented the element in their respective 
nations that sensed that individual allotting of tribal lands was inevi
table and therefore something they must accept.

Wisdom wrote to urge Congress to act upon the provision in the 
1835 Cherokee Treaty that entitled them to send a delegate to the 
U.S. Congress. He argued that such a move would bring clarity to the 
status of the Cherokee Nation and save money for both the Cherokee 
and the federal government.

U.S. Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Annual Report (1896).

Dew M. Wisdom’s Report

Report of Union Agency

Union Agency, Muskogee, Ind. T., September 10, 1896.

