 
 UNITED STATES 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS
OF THE

ALABAMA-QUASSARTE TRIBAL TOWN 

OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED JANUARY 10, 1939 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON: 1939 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE ALABAMA- 
QUASSARTE TRIBAL TOWN

PREAMBLE


We, the Creek Indians of the Alabama-Quassarte Tribal Town, a 
recognized band of Indians composed of the former tribal towns of 
Alabama and Quassarte No. 1, in order to get the benefits of the Okla
homa Indian Welfare Act, do adopt the following constitution and 
by-laws to govern our town.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Alabama-Quassarte 

Tribal Town.

Article II—Object

The object shall be to get land and either operate it together as 
a town or to assign it to members of the town for their use; to borrow 
money for general town enterprises as well as to relend it to its mem
bers; to protect the members of the town from loss of, or injury to, 
their land and property; to care for old and unfortunate members 
and to assist the injured to obtain proper medical and hospital care; 
to carry on the traditions of the town, and to promote the general 
welfare of the town and its members.

Article III—Membership

All persons who were on either the 1890 authenticated census roll 
or the 1895 pay roll of the towns of Alabama and Quassarte No. 1 were 
and shall be members. All persons born of parents both of whom 
were members when the person was born were and shall be members. 
All persons born of women who were members when the person was 
born were and shall be members. All persons born of non-Indian 
women whose fathers were members when the person was born were 
and shall be members. All members shall have equal rights except 
as set forth below in connection with eligibility for office.

Article IV—Adoption and Withdrawal of Members

Any Indian may be adopted as a member by the Chief with the 
consent of the Governing Committee through its chairman, and with 
the consent of the Secretary of the Interior. All applications for 
adoption shall be investigated at the former home of the applicant 
and shall be acted upon within thirty days after they are made. No 
person not a citizen of the United States may be adopted as a member 

of the town unless he was residing in the following described terri
tory on May 1, 1937:

The territory bounded on the west by a line running along the west 
line of Township 9N, 12E to the South Canadian River, on the south 
by the South Canadian River, on the east by a line running along the 
east line of Township 9N, 11E, on the north by Okfuskee county line.
Any person applying for adoption shall pay a fee of five dollars 
unless he was residing in the above described territory on May 1, 
1937, or unless he is married to a member of the town. Any person 
who is adopted must give up all of his allegiance and rights arising 
from membership in any other Indian tribe or band, other than the 
Creek Nation of Indians of Oklahoma, before adoption into this 
town. If the applicant is a member of another Creek Town, the con
sent of that town must be obtained, provided such town is still in 
existence.

Any member may withdraw from membership by filing written 
notice thereof with the Chief who shall consent to the same in writing, 
and give a copy to the person withdrawing.

Article V—Officers

The officers of this town shall be the Chief, the Second Chief, the 
Secretary, the Floor Speaker, the Solicitor, the Chairman of the 
Governing Committee, and twelve members of the Governing Commit
tee. The powers of the town shall be exercised by the Chief with the 
consent of the Governing Committee. In case of a dispute between 
the Governing Committee and the Chief, the matter shall be settled 
by the Solicitor. The Solicitor and the Floor Speaker may each ap
point an assistant and as many interpreters as they may need. The 
present officers shall continue in office for a period of four years from 
the adoption of this Constitution and By-laws, or until their succes
sors are elected and installed, and an election of officers shall be held 
by the town membership each fourth year thereafter.

Article VI—Eligibility for Office

Men shall be eligible for office at the age of twenty-one and women 
at the age of eighteen. No person shall be eligible to take office after 
the adoption of this Constitution and By-laws unless he is a member 
of the town. No mixed blood member may hold office unless it shall 
be decided by a majority vote of the members that he is dependable 
and has special qualifications. Adopted members may take office only 
with the consent of the members by a majority vote. Any person 
removed from office for willful neglect of duty shall not be eligible 
for office for one year thereafter. Any person removed from office for 
a minor fault shall not be eligible for office for six months thereafter.

Article VII—Removal From Office and Filling Vacancies

Officers may be removed by a majority vote of the members of the 
town. Vacancies in office shall be filled for the unexpired term by a 
majority vote of the Governing Committee.

Article VIII—Eligibility to Vote

Men shall be eligible to vote at the age of twenty-one and women at 

the age of eighteen.

Article IX—Bill of Rights

No member shall be treated differently because he does or does not 

believe in or take part in any religion or religious custom.

This Constitution shall not in any way be construed to alter, abridge 
or otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of 
this Tribal Town as citizens of the Creek Nation, the State of Okla
homa or of the United States.

The individual vested property rights of any member of the Tribal 
Town shall not be altered, abridged, or otherwise affected by the pro
visions of this Constitution by By-laws without the consent of such 
individual member.
 
 

BY-LAWS

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

The Chief shall preside at all meetings of the members of the town. 
He shall, at all times, have general supervision of the affairs of the 
town. It shall also be his duty to countersign all checks against funds 
of the town.

In the absence of the Chief, the Second Chief shall preside at all 
meetings of the members of the town and shall act in his stead in all 
matters pertaining to the office of Chief.

The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of 
the Governing Committee and of the meetings of the town and furnish 
copies thereof to the Superintendent and the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs. He shall attend to the keeping of official records of the town 
and shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all 
correspondence pertaining to the business of the town. All official 
records of the Secretary shall be open to inspection by the members 
of the town at all reasonable times.

The Floor Speaker shall act as spokesman for the officers before 
the members of the town. He shall be the custodian of all funds in 
the possession of the town from any source. At such time as the Gov
erning Committee or the Secretary of the Interior shall deem it neces
sary he shall give a bond with a surety company of recognized standing 
in an amount to be determined by the Governing Committee, such 
surety and bond to be approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 
He shall keep an accurate record of all town funds and shall disburse 
the same in accordance with the vote of the Governing Committee. 
The books of the Floor Speaker containing the financial status of 
the town shall be open to audit and examination by duly authorized 
officers of the Secretary of the Interior at all times, and shall be open 
to inspection by members of the town and its officers.

The Solicitor shall speak for the town before the United States 
Government and represent it in the meetings of the Creek Federation 
and in such other ways as he may be instructed by the Governing 
Committee.

Article II—Meetings

Meetings of the Governing Committee and the other officers shall be 
held on the last Thursday of the month following the adoption of this 
Constitution and By-laws and on the last Thursday of every alter
nate month thereafter. Meetings of the members shall be held on the 
last Thursday of the second month after the adoption of this Con
stitution and By-laws, and on the last Thursday of every alternate 
month thereafter. All action shall be by majority vote. All meetings 
shall be held at Mrs. Levina Beaver’s home until otherwise ordered 
by the Chief with the consent of the governing body. At meetings 
of the Governing Committee, seven members of the committee with 
the chairman shall be a quorum for the transaction of business. The 
chairman of the Governing Committee shall vote only in case of a tie.

Article III—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be proposed 
by a majority vote of the Governing Committee or by a petition signed 
by thirty per cent of the adult members of the town, and if approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior shall be submitted to a referendum 
vote of the members of the town, and shall be effective if approved 
by a majority vote of those voting in the election; Provided, at least 
30 per cent of the eligible voters shall vote.

Article IV—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the 
members of the Alabama-Quassarte Tribal Town voting at an elec
tion called by the Secretary of the Interior under regulations which 
he may prescribe pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian 
Welfare Act of June 26, 1936.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Alabama-Quassarte Tribal 
Town of Oklahoma.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended November 10,1938.

John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

Washington, D. C., November 17, 1938.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 17, 1938 by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 

submitted for ratification to the members of the Alabama-Quassarte 
Tribal Town of Oklahoma and was on January 10, 1939, duly ap
proved by a vote of 57 for, and 13 against, in an election in which 
over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant 
to section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 
(49 Stat. 1967).

The Alabama-Quassarte Governing Committee, 

By Sandy Wesley, 
Daniel Beaver.

J. T. Wilkinson,

Acting Superintendent, Five Civilized Tribes.

