 
 CONSTITUTION 
 

AND

C IVIL AND CRIMINAL CODE

OF THE

MUSKOKEE NATION,

APPROVED AT THE

COUNCIL GROUND MUSKOKEE NATION,


 
 OCTOBER 12, 1867.

WASHINGTON, D. C.
McGILL & WlTHEROW, PRINTERS AND STEREOTYPERS..

1868. 
 

CONSTITUTION

OF THE


MUSKOKEE NATION.

In order to form a more perfect union, establish justice, and 
secure to ourselves and our children the blessings of free
dom and liberty, We, the people of the Muskokee Nation 
do adopt this Constitution:

ARTICLE I.

Sec. 1. The Law-making power of this Nation shall be 
lodged in a Council to consist of two houses, namely: a 
house of Kings and a house of Warriors.

Sec. 2. Each Town shall be entitled to one member for 
the house of Warriors, and an additional member for every 
two hundred persons, who shall be elected for the term of 
four years, by the vote of their respective Towns.

Sec. 3. Each Town shall be entitled to one member for 
the house of Kings, who shall be elected for the term of four 
years, by the vote of their respective Towns.

Sec. 4. Each member of both houses shall receive a 
compensation out of National Treasury to be provided for 
by law.

Sec. 5. A majority of each house shall constitute a quo
rum to do business, and a less number may adjourn from 
day to day and compel the presence of the absentees.

Sec. 6. Each house shall judge of the returns and qual
ifications of its members, impeach a member for disorderly 
conduct, and by the concurrence of the two-thirds of both

houses expel a member. Neither house shall adjourn for a 
longer period than two days without the consent of both 
houses.

Sec. 7. The house of Warriors shall elect its own Speaker.
Sec. 8. The house of Kings shall elect its own President.
Sec. 9. Each house shall choose its own Secretary, whose 
pay shall be provided for by law; and terms of service to 
continue at the discretion of the houses.

Sec. 10. No person shall be chosen to either of these houses 
who shall not be an acknowledged citizen, and who shall 
not have attained to the age of twenty-two years.

ARTICLE II.

Sec. 1. There shall be one Principal Chief, to be styled 
the Principal Chief of the Muskokee Nation, who shall be 
elected by a majority of the votes of the male citizens of the 
Muskokee Nation who shall have attained to the age of 
eighteen years, for the term of four years. There shall also 
be a Second Chief, who shall be chosen in the same manner 
as that prescribed for the election of Principal Chief for the 
same term, who, in case of the death, resignation, or removal 
from office of the Principal Chief, shall perform all the 
duties of that office.

Sec. 2. No person shall be eligible to the office of Princi
pal or Second Chief of the Muskokee Nation who is not a 
recognized citizen of the same, and who shall not have 
attained to the age of thirty years.

Sec. 3. The Principal Chief is hereby invested with the 
reprieving and pardoning power. He shall see that all the 
laws of this Nation are faithfully executed and enforced, and 
also it shall be the duty of the Principal Chief to make an 
annual report to the National Council of the condition of 
affairs in the Muskokee Nation, and to recommend such 
measures as may be deemed necessary for the welfare of the 
Nation; and for any neglect of duty he shall be subject to 
impeachment, trial, and removal from office.

Sec. 4. Whenever any bill or measure shall pass both

houses, before it become a law it shall be submitted to the 
Principal Chief for his approval or rejection. If he shall 
approve it, it shall become a law. If, however, he shall ob
ject to it, he shall return the bill to the house in which it 
originated, within five days, accompanied with his objec
tions; but if not returned within five days it shall become a 
law. If, however, any bill shall be passed over his veto by 
a two-third vote in both houses, it shall become a law.

Sec. 5. When any bill shall pass both houses, and is sub
mitted to the Principal Chief for approval or rejection, and 
he not having time to return the same within five days on 
account of adjournment, he shall be allowed three days in 
the next council within which to return the same.

ARTICLE III.

Sec. 1. The supreme law-defining power of this Nation 
shall be lodged in a high Court, to be composed of five com
petent persons, who shall be chosen by the National Council 
for the term of four years.

Sec. 2. This Court shall meet on the first Monday in Oc
tober of each year, and shall have power to try all cases 
where the issue is for more than one hundred dollars.

Sec. 3. No one shall be eligible to a position in this Court 
but a recognized citizen of the Muskokee Nation who shall 
have attained to the age of twenty-five years, and a majority 
of these officers being present, shall form a quorum to do 
business, whose pay shall be provided for by law.

ARTICLE IV.

Sec. 1. The Muskokee Nation shall be divided into six 
districts, and each district shall be furnished with one com
pany of Light Horsemen, whose compensation shall be pro
vided for by law.

Sec. 2. Each company shall consist of one officer and four 

privates.

Sec. 3. These officers shall be elected for the term of two 

years, by the vote of their respective districts.

ARTICLE V.

Sec. 1. There shall be one Judge chosen by the National 
Council for the term of two years in each district, who shall 
try all cases in his district, civil and criminal, when the issue 
does not exceed one hundred dollars.

Sec. 2. These Judges shall have the right to summons in 
criminal cases twenty-four disinterested men, out of which 
number twelve men shall be selected for the trial of crimi
nals, and a jury of nine men for the trial of civil cases.

Sec. 3. Each juror failing to obey a summons without 
good reasons therefor, shall be fined the sum of five dollars, 
and each juror shall receive one dollar per diem while in 
service.

Sec. 4. That company of Light Horsemen in his district 

shall be subservient to his orders.

Sec. 5. Each district Judge shall be allowed a clerk during 
the session of Court, whose pay shall be provided for by law.
Sec. 6. There shall be one Prosecuting Attorney in each 
district, to be appointed by the Principal Chief, by and with 
the consent of the National Council.

Sec. 7. It shall be the duty of the Prosecuting Attorney 
to indict and prosecute all offenders against the laws in his 
respective district, and for each and every convict he shall 
be paid the sum of twenty-five dollars.

ARTICLE VI.

All cases shall be tried according to the provisions of the 

respective laws under which they originated.

ARTICLE VII.

All persons shall be allowed the right of counsel.

ARTICLE VIII.

All bills of impeachment shall originate in the house of 

Warriors.

ARTICLE IX.

All treaties shall be made by delegates duly recommended 
by the Principal Chief, and approved by the National Coun
cil; and such treaties shall be subject to the ratification of 
the National Council.

ARTICLE X.
 No laws impairing contracts shall be passed, nor laws 
taking effect upon things that occurred before the enactment 
of the law, shall be passed.

ARTICLE XI.

There shall be a private secretary allowed the Principal 
Chief, who shall be compensated out of the National Treas
ury, as shall be provided for by law—said officer to be 
selected by the Principal Chief.

ARTICLE XII.

There shall be a National Interpreter, to be elected by the 
National Council, for the term of four years, whose com
pensation shall be fixed by law.
 
 

ARTICLE XIIL

 
 The style of the action of the Council shall be: “Be it 

enacted by the National Council of the Muskokee Nation.”

ARTICLE XIV.

There shall be one Treasurer for the Muskokee Nation, to 
be elected by the National Council, for the term of four 
years, whose duty shall be to receive and receipt for all na
tional funds, and to disburse the same as shall be provided 
for by law. He shall report the condition of national 
finances to the National Council at least once every year. 
He shall be required to bind himself in a bond of five 
thousand ($5,000) dollars with good security for the faithful 
performance and discharge of his duty.

ARTICLE XV.

No moneys shall be drawn from the National Treasury 
except to carry out appropriations made by the National 
Council, and when such an appropriation is provided for by 
law, the Principal Chief shall issue a draft upon the Treas
ury to meet the provision.

ARTICLE XVI.

All officers of this Government shall be liable to impeach

ment, trial, and removal from office for neglect of duty.

ARTICLE XVII.

All Treaties shall be the supreme law of the land.

Approved, Council Ground Muskokee Nation, October 

12, 1867.

SAMUEL CHECOTE.
 
  
  
  
  
  
 
OKTAHASARSHAJO,   X
 
 mark.
his 
 
X

MICCO HUTKEY,  

 
 his 
 

PINK HAWKINS,  

 
 mark. 
his 
 

X

 
  
 mark.

G. W. Grayson, Sec’y. 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 