HeinOnline

Citation:
George Emory Fay, Compiler %26 Editor. Charters,
Constitutions and By-Laws of the Indian Tribes of North
America (1967-1981 All Published).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Wed Jun 27 13:12:48 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF ALTURAS INDIAN RANCHERIA

MODOC COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

 
 Approved May 30, 1972
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the people of the Alturas Indian Rancheria in Modoc County, California, in or

der to establish a formal organization and promote our common welfare, do hereby 

adopt this constitution and bylaws.

The name of this organization shall be the Alturas Indian Rancheria.

ARTICLE I  — NAME

ARTICLE II — TERRITORY

The jurisdiction of the Alturas Indian Rancheria shall extend to all lands now or 

hereafter comprising the Alturas Indian Rancheria. The jurisdiction of the Alturas 
Indian Rancheria shall not be inconsistent with applicable Federal and State laws.

SECTION 1. Membership in the Alturas Indian Rancheria shall consist of persons 

in the following categories:

ARTICLE III — MEMBERSHIP

(a)  Persons of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree California Indian blood who 
on the effective date of this constitution hold valid assignments on 
the Alturas Indian Rancheria and have resided on the rancheria for a 
period of not less than one year.

(b)  Persons of not less than one-fourth (1/4) degree California Indian blood 
who hereafter acquire valid assignments on the Alturas Indian Rancher
ia; and

(c)  Descendants of persons in subsection (a) or (b) above, provided such 

descendants are not less than one-fourth (1/4) degree California Indian 
blood.

SEC. 2. No person shall be a. member of the Alturas Indian Rancheria who was a 
member of any tribe or band of Indians when its trust relationship with the Federal 
Government was terminated; or who has been allotted on another reservation or on the 
public domain; or who has relinquished in writing his right to membership on the Al
turas Indian Rancheria; or who is officially enrolled with or is recognized as a mem
ber of some other tribe or band of Indians. A "recognized” member of another tribe 
or band of Indians is a person who has received a land use assignment or has other
wise received benefits as a member of another reservation or rancheria, except through 
inheritance.

SEC. 3. The official membership roll shall be kept current at all times.

SEC. 4. Except for persons already adopted, admission to membership through adop
tion shall be in accordance with an ordinance enacted by the governing body, such or
dinance to become effective upon approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

ARTICLE IV — GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Alturas Indian Rancheria shall be the gen

eral council which shall consist of all members who hold assignments on the rancher
ia and all other members who are eighteen (18) years of age or older. Each member 
of the general council is also a qualified voter.

SBC. 2. The general council shall elect by secret ballot a business committee con
sisting of a chairman, a vice-chairman and a secretary-treasurer. Business committee 
members shall be members of the general council. Such other committees may be ap
pointed or elected as from time to time may be deemed necessary.

SBC. 3. Meetings of the general council shall be held on dates set by the busi

ness committee, with proper notice given to all general council members. Special 
meetings may be called by the chairman of the business committee, or by written pe
tition of not less than fifty-one percent (51%) of the general council membership. 
Fifty-one percent (51%) of the general council membership shall constitute a quorum, 
and no election or business shall be conducted in the absence of a quorum. Registra
tion will not be necessary to vote in any election or business session.

ARTICLE V — ELECTIONS

SECTION 1. Officers of the business committee shall be elected every two years on 

the first Monday in April, beginning in April following the approval of this organi
zational document. Each term of office shall be for two years or until a successor 
is elected and installed. Any member eighteen (18) years of age or older, if duly 
nominated and elected, has the right to hold office. Nominations shall be from the 
floor at a general council meeting. The election shall be held as the next order of 
business following the completion of nominations. However, following approval of 
this organizational document the individuals now holding office shall serve as the 
business committee under this constitution until the first regular election is held 
as provided herein.

SEC. 2. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes for the respective 
offices shall be declared elected. In case an election results in a tie vote, the 
chairman shall order a new election for the office or offices in question, which 
election shall be held within thirty (30) days. The same candidates shall be voted 
upon in the second election.

SEC. 3. All elections of officers shall be conducted by the business committee, 
and voting will be by secret ballot, with the name of each candidate and the office 
he seeks shown thereon. Absentee ballots shall not be allowed,

ARTICLE VI  — VACANCIES AND REMOVAL

SECTION 1. If an officer shall die, or resign, the office shall be automatically 
vacated. Any office which is vacated shall be filled within thirty (30) days of the 
date it becomes vacant by a special election at a general council meeting called for 
this purpose by the business committee unless such vacancy occurs within sixty (60) 
days of the regular biennial election. Such replacement officer shall serve the un

expired term of office.

SEC. 2. Not more than ten (10) days after receipt of a petition requesting the 
removal from office of an elected official, which petition shall set forth the spe
cific reasons for which removal is sought and shall be signed by not less than fifty- 
one percent (51%) of the voters, the business committee shall call a general council 
meeting to hear the charges against the official. It shall at the same time notify 
the accused in writing of the charges against him and of the date, hour and place of 
the general council meeting at which time he may appear and answer those charges. 
After the accused has had full opportunity to be heard by the general council, a se
cret ballot vote of guilty or not guilty will be conducted. The decision of a major
ity of those present and voting shall govern, providing at least fifty-one percent 
(51%) of those eligible to vote shall vote. If the official is found guilty by such 
vote, his office shall be automatically vacated and the general council shall proceed 
to nominate candidates and elect a replacement official who shall serve the unexpired 
term of office. Such general council meeting shall be held within thirty (30) days 
of the date that a valid petition for removal action is filed with the business com
mittee.

SEC. 3. In neither of the elections provided for in this article shall absentee 

ballots be cast.

ARTICLE VII — POWERS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL AND THE 
 
 

BUSINESS COMMITTEE

 
 SECTION 1. The general council shall have the powers and responsibilities here
inafter provided, subject to any limitation imposed upon such powers by the statutes 
of the United States or the State of California.

(a)  To consult, negotiate, contract or conclude agreements with Federal, state, 

and local governments on activities which may affect the Alturas Indian 
Rancheria.

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be sub
ject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized re
presentative.

(c)  No sale, disposition, lease, encumbrance of tribal lands, interest in lands 

or other tribal assets shall be made without the consent of the governing 
body of the Alturas Indian Rancheria.

(d)  To receive advice from and make recommendations to the Secretary of the In
terior with regard to all appropriation estimates or Federal projects for 
the benefit of members of the Alturas Indian Rancheria prior to the submis
sion of such estimates to the Office of Management and Budget and to Con
gress.

(e)  To administer all lands and assets and manage all economic affairs and enter

prises on unassigned lands of the Alturas Indian Rancheria.

(f)  To acquire property and to accept gifts.

(g)  To assess fees for payment of the expenses of, or to finance, any project

which is for the benefit of the members of the Alturas Indian Rancheria as a 
whole.

(h)  To establish rules of procedure for the conduct of its affairs.

SEC. 2. The following powers shall be set forth in ordinances passed by the gener
al council and approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representa
tive.

(a)  To make assignments of rancheria land, which ordinance shall be submitted for 

approval by the Secretary of the Interior within thirty (30) days after the 
first election of officers held following the approval of this organization
al document.

(b)  To prescribe rules and regulations governing loss of membership.

SEC. 3. The business committee shall have the following administrative powers and 

duties, but shall not commit the Alturas Indian Rancheria to any contract, lease, or 
other arrangement unless it is so empowered by a duly enacted ordinance or resolution 
of the general council:

(a)  To promulgate all ordinances, resolutions, or other enactments of the Alturas 

Indian Rancheria,

(b)  To represent the members in all negotiations between the band and local, 

state and Federal Governments, their agencies and officers.

(c) Faithfully advise the members of all aforementioned negotiations.

SEC. 4, Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Indians of the Alturas 
Rancheria but not expressly referred to in this article shall not be lost by reason 
of their omission but may be exercised with the adoption of appropriate resolutions, 
ordinances, bylaws or amendments,

ARTICLE VIII — BILL OF RIGHTS

SECTION 1, The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1968 (82 Stat, 73) against actions of a tribe in the exercise of its powers of 
self-government shall apply to the Alturas Indian Rancheria, its officers and all 
persons within its jurisdiction,

ARTICLE IX — AMENDMENT AND REVOCATION

SECTION 1. This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the 
qualified voters who are eighteen years of age or over at an election authorized for 
that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior provided at least thirty percent (30%) 
of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election. It shall be the duty of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs to call such an election at the request of the busi
ness council or upon presentation of a petition signed by at least thirty (30%) of 

the members of the tribal council,

SEC. 2. This constitution and bylaws may be revoked in the same manner in which 

it was adopted, except that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of all those members

entitled to vote must vote in such an election.

SEC. 3. The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman when called upon to do so, 

and in the absence of the chairman he shall have the duties of that officer.

SEC. 4 The secretary-treasurer shall keep the minutes of all meetings and shall 

attest to the enactment of all resolutions and ordinances. Copies of all minutes, 
resolutions, and ordinances shall be submitted by him to the Bureau of Indian Af
fairs as soon after enactment as possible. The secretary-treasurer shall carry out 
the financial directives of the general council, receive all local monies of the 
rancheria, and keep an accurate account of the receipts and disbursements. Funds 
shall be deposited in the rancheria account in a local bank selected by the general 
council where depositors' funds are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Cor
poration. All disbursements shall be made by check in accordance with resolutions 
of the general council and shall be co—signed by the chairman or the vice-chairman 
in the absence of the chairman. The secretary-treasurer shall file a bond satisfac
tory to the general council and the Area Director, when either are of the opinion 
sufficient funds have accumulated in the rancheria treasury. The general council 
shall authorize payment of the annual bond premium from the local rancheria funds. 
The secretary-treasurer shall give a financial report to the general council at each 
meeting, and all financial records shall be available for inspection by a member of 
the Alturas Indian Rancheria and by representatives of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

ARTICLE X — ADOPTION

SECTION 1. This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the 

qualified voters of the Alturas Indian Rancheria who are eighteen years of age or 
over, voting at an election authorized for that purpose by the Secretary of the In
terior, provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall 
vote in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for ap
proval, and, if approved, shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on April 

18, 1972, under delegated authority, the attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Al

turas Indian Rancheria, Modoc County, California, was submitted to the qualified vo
ters of the rancheria and was on April 18, 1972, duly adopted by a vote of 5 for and 
0 against, in an election in which at least thirty (30) percent of the 5 persons en
titled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with the Indian Reorganization Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 
378).

FRANK L. HAGGERTY, JR. 

Chairman, Election Board.
 
  
  
  
 

VIOLET DEL ROSE 
 
 Election Board Member 
 

NORMA GARCIA
 
 Election Board Member 
 

APPROVAL


I,  HARRISON LOESCH, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 

America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Constitution and Bylaws of 
Alturas Indian Rancheria, Modoc, California.

Approval Recommended:

JOHN 0. CROW

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

WASHINGTON, D.C.

Date: May 30, 1972.
 
 

HARRISON LOESCH

 
 Assistant Secretary of the Interior.

[SEAL]

