 
  
 REVISED CONSTITUTION OF THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE 
 

MESCALERO RESERVATION, NEW MEXICO

 
 —16-

Approved March 25, 1936

Revised January 12, 1965
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of he Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation, in order to pro 

mote justice, insure tranquility, encourage the general welfare, foster the social 
and economic advancement of our people, safeguard our interests, bring our represen
tative tribal government into closer alignment with State and National governments, 
and secure for ourselves and for our posterity the blessings of freedom and liberty, 
do hereby establish this revised constitution as the foundation upon which our tri
bal government shall rest.

ARTICLE I — THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

SECTION 1. The Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation, hereinafter referred 

to as the Mescalero Apache Tribe, shall include all persons recognized as members 
thereof, or upon whom membership may be conferred, pursuant to the provisions and 
restrictions imposed by Article IV of this constitution, irrespective of the Apache 
Band with which they may be identified.

ARTICLE II — TERRITORY

SECTION 1. The jurisdiction of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, its tribal council 

and courts shall extend to all the territory within the exterior boundaries of the 
reservation, and to such other lands as may be added thereto by purchase, gift, Act 
of Congress, or otherwise.

ARTICLE III — RESERVATION LANDS

SECTION 1. Title to reservation lands shall remain tribal property and shall not, 
in whole or in part, be granted by allotment or otherwise to tribal members or groups 
of members as private property. The control of reservation lands, and of assignments 
or leases thereof, and of other tribal property, shall be in the tribal council, sub
ject to applicable Federal authority, and regulated by ordinances not inconsistent 
with or contrary to this constitution.

SEC. 2. The tribal council shall have power to assign unused tribal lands, or to 

reassign any unused assignments, or portions thereof, which have been idle for two 
(2) or more years. No reassignment of a homestead may be made so long as the origi
nal assignee shall reside on the homesite, unless he shall voluntarily release the 
homesite to the tribe. A member may transfer his homesite to one of his children. 
The tribal council shall decide by ordinance what shall constitute a unit for purpos
es of assignment of land for private use, and shall determine the rules governing the 
use and transfer of such assignments.

-17-

SEC, 3, A non-member who is the surviving spouse of a member of the tribe shall 
have the privilege to use an assignment for the benefit of enrolled minor children, 
but a non-member shall not acquire any vested interest or rights in any tribal prop
erty, except as otherwise provided by ordinance of the tribal council, or by applica
ble Federal law,
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. The membership of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall consist of the 

folloWing persons:

(a)  Any person whose name appeared on the Census Roll of the Mescalero Apache 

Agency of January 1, 1936,

(b)  All persons born to resident members after the census of January 1, 1936, 

and prior to the effective date of this constitution.

(c)  Any child born to a non-resident member, prior to the effective date of 

this constitution, provided that such child shall have resided on the Mes
calero Reservation for not less than one (1) year immediately preceding 
the date of enrollment,

(d)  Any person of one-fourth degree or more Mescalero Apache blood, born after 

the effective date of this constitution, either one or both of whose par
ents is (are) enrolled in the membership of the Mescalero Apache Tribe.

SEC, 2. No person, being enrolled or recognized as a member of another tribe, 

shall be eligible for enrollment in the Mescalero Apache Tribe,

SEC, 3. The tribal council shall have the power to adopt ordinances, consistent 
with this constitution, governing future membership, loss of membership, and the adop
tion of members into the Mescalero Apache Tribe, which ordinances shall be subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior.

SEC, 4, The tribal council shall have the power to prescribe rules to govern the 
compilation and maintenance of a membership roll, and to make corrections in the basic 
roll, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

SEC, 5, The constitution of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, and ordinances enacted 
pursuant thereto, shall govern tribal membership and enrollment. No decree of any 
non-tribal court purporting to determine membership in the tribe, determine paternity, 
or determine the degree of Indian blood, shall be recognized for membership purposes. 
The tribal council shall have sole authority and original jurisdiction to determine 
eligibility for enrollment, except where the membership of an individual is dependent 
upon an issue of paternity, in which case the trial court, or the tribal council sit
ting as an appellate court, shall have authority and exclusive jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1, Subject to the limitations prescribed by this constitution, all members 

of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall have equal political rights and equal opportuni
ties to participate in the economic resources and tribal assets and no member shall 
be denied freedom of conscience, speech, religion, association or assembly, nor shall 
he be denied the right to petition the tribal council for the redress of grievances 
against the tribe,

ARTICLE VI — DISQUALIFICATION OF TRIBAL MEM
 
 
BERS FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE

 
 -18-

SECTION 1. No person who has been convicted of any felony or other serious of

fense, including adultery, bribery, embezzlement, extortion, fraud, forgery, mis
branding, perjury, theft, habitual drunkenness, or felonious: assault or felonious 
battery, shall be eligible for candidacy to any elective office of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe unless he shall have been pardoned by the President of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe in conformity with applicable ordinances and procedures prescribed by 
the tribal council,

ARTICLE VII — ORGANIZATION OF THE GOVERNMENT 
 
 
OF THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1, The powers of the government of the Mescalero Apache Tribe are di
vided into three distinct departments, the Legislative, the Executive and the Judi
cial, and no person or group of persons charged with the exercise of powers properly 
belonging to one of these departments, shall exercise any powers properly belonging 
to either of the others, except as this constitution may otherwise expressly direct 
or permit,

ARTICLE VIII — PART I — THE LEGISLATIVE DE
PARTMENT: COMPOSITION AND QUALIFICATIONS

SECTION 1, The legislative powers of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall rest in 
the Mescalero Apache Tribal Council, hereinafter referred to as the tribal council, 
which shall hold its sessions at the seat of the tribal government,

SEC, 2, The tribal council shall consist of eight (8) members, elected at large 

from the membership of the Mescalero Apache Tribe,

SEC, 3, The members of the tribal council shall be at least twenty-five (25) 

years of age at the time of election or appointment (Article X, Section 4); shall 
have one-quarter or more Mescalero Apache Indian blood; shall have resided on the 
Mescalero Apache Reservation for a period of at least six (6) months immediately 
prior to the election, and shall be subject to the restrictions set out in Article 
 
 
VI,

 
 SEC, 4, No person shall serve as a member of the Mescalero Apache Tribal Coun
cil while holding any other elective office, or policy making position with the tribe 
or with any organization doing business on the Mescalero Reservation,

ARTICLE IX — NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

SECTION 1, An election board, appointed by the president of the Mescalero Apache 

Tribe, shall supervise and administer all elections in accordance with established 
tribal ordinances, and in conformity with this constitution; Provided, That no mem
ber of the election board shall be at the same time a member of the tribal council 
or a candidate for tribal office, and provided further that persons so appointed by 
the president shall be confirmed by the tribal council,

SBC, 2, Any member of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall have the right to vote 

in any tribal election provided such member:

(a) Ie at least twenty-one (21) years of age at the time of such election.

-19-

(b) Has resided within a fifty (50) mile radius of the tribal administra

tive office, which office is located on the reservation, for a period 
of at least six (6) months immediately prior to the day of election.

SEC. 3. Members of the tribal council, and all other elective officials of the 
Mescalero Apache Tribe, shall be chosen by secret ballot, the form of which shall be 
established by ordinance enacted by the tribal council.

SEC. 4. The tribal council, by ordinance, shall make provision for absentee vot

ing, including the use of a secret ballot for this purpose,

SEC. 5. No member of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be deprived of his right to 
vote, if otherwise qualified, because of temporary absence from the reservation. Tem
porary absence shall be defined, for purposes of this section, as follows:

(a) Absence for the purpose of attending an educational institution for 

purposes of obtaining formal training, or

(b) Absence for purposes of receiving treatment at a regular hospital, 

clinic or sanitarium, or

(c) Absence for purposes of service in the Armed Forces of the United 

States, or

(d) Absence for purposes of obtaining additional educational training 

in regularly held training sessions, or

(e) Absence for any other reason which does not exceed six (6) months’ 
duration, immediately preceding a tribal election, without return 
to the physical limits of the reservation.

SEC. 6. Any qualified member of the Mescalero Apache Tribe who desires that his 

(her) name be placed on the ballot as a candidate for the office of president, vice- 
president or council member in the primary election shall file with the tribal secre
tary a statement of intention shewing his (her) name and the office for which he(she) 
desires to become a candidate. Such statement shall be filed not less than fifteen 
(15) days preceding the primary election.

SEC. 7. A primary election to select candidates for the offices of the president, 
vice-president and council members shall be held at least thirty (30) days before the 
general election of the tribe. The two nominees receiving the highest number of votes 
for president shall be the only candidates for the office of president at the next 
general election. The two nominees receiving the highest number of votes for vice- 
president shall be the only candidates for vice-president in the next general elec
tion. The eight nominees receiving the highest number of votes, for council members 
shall be the only candidates for council members in the next general election.

SEC. 8. General elections to vote for tribal council members and all elected of

ficers of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be held annually on the third Friday of 
December. Notice of both the primary and general elections shall be posted at least 
thirty (30) days before each such election at the voting place and in three (3) or 
more additional public places. Such notice shall be posted by the secretary of the 
tribal council. In case the time of the general election should conflict with a holi
day, the election shall be held on the following work day.

-20-

SEC. 9. No candidate shall be permitted to withdraw except by filing a written 
notice thereof with the tribal secretary at least twelve (12) days before the primary 
and the general election. The tribal secretary shall post the names of all candidates 
at the voting place, and at three or more additional public places at least ten (10) 

days before the primary and general election.

SEC. 10. The first election of tribal council members and officers under this con 
stitution shall be held on the first general election date following its adoption and 
ratification. The candidate with the highest number of votes for the office of pre
sident shall hold the office for two (2) years. The candidate with the highest num
ber of votes for the office of vice-president shall hold that office for two (2) 
years. The four candidates receiving the highest number of votes for council member- 
at-large shall hold office for two (2) years. The four candidates receiving the next 
highest number of votes for council member-at-large shall hold office for one (1) 
year. Tie votes shall be decided by lot. The term of office for these newly elected 
council members shall start on the second Friday of the month of January following 
the election, at which time the incumbent business committee will be dissolved.

SEC. 11. Succeeding members of the Mescalero Apache Tribal Council shall be elect 

ed to serve for a term of two (2) years, with one-half of the members-at-large there
of elected each year. The term of office of newly elected members shall start on the 
second Friday of the month of January following the election.

SEC. 12. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes at the general elec

tion for the office of president shall become the president. The candidate receiving 
the highest number of votes at the general election for the office of vice-president 
shall become the vice-president.

SEC. 13. The four candidates for the office of councilman-at-large receiving the 

highest number of votes cast in each general election, and the winning candidates for 
the office of president and vice-president, shall be certified to the tribal council 
by the election board as the duly elected councilmen and officers of the tribe.

SEC. 14. No person shall be a candidate for more than one office in any primary 

election.

SEC. 15. Any tie vote shall be decided by lot before the tribal council.

ARTICLE X — VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

SECTION 1. Any member of the tribal council or elected officer of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe who, during the term for which he is elected, is convicted of any felony, 
shall automatically forfeit his office. Any member of the tribal council or elected 
officer found guilty of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, gross neglect of du
ty, malfeasance in office or misconduct reflecting on the dignity and integrity of 
the tribal government, may be removed from office by majority vote of the tribal coun
cil. Before any vote for removal from office is taken, such member or officer shall 
be given a written statement of the charges against him at least five (5) days before 
the meeting of the tribal council before which he is to appear, and he shall be given 
an opportunity to answer any and all charges at the designated council meeting. The 
decision of the tribal council shall be final.

SEC. 2. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) 
of the eligible voters demanding recall of any member of the tribal council, or elect

d officer, filed with the secretary of the tribal council at least four (4) months

-21-

before the expiration of such council member’s, or official’s, term of office, it 
shall be the duty of the tribal council to call a special election upon the question 
of recall. Such election shall be held not less than twenty-five (25) nor more than 
forty (40) days from the filing of the petition. No council member or elected offi
cer may be recalled unless a majority of the members voting vote in favor of the re
call, and unless at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters vote in the 
election.

SEC. 3. If a member of the tribal council fails to attend two (2) successive meet

ings of the tribal council or a committee thereof, of which he is a member, or any 
combination of tribal council or such committee meetings, he shall automatically cease 
to be a member of the tribal council. In such event, the tribal council shall declare 
the position vacant and the president shall, subject to confirmation by the tribal 
council, appoint a successor to serve the unexpired term, unless such member:

(a)  Is excused by the tribal council, or

(b)  Is absent by reason of illness, or due to reasons beyond his control, 

which are satisfactory to the tribal council.

SEC. 4. In the event of a vacancy, for any cause, in the membership of the tribal 

council, the unexpired term corresponding to the vacancy shall be filled by a quali
fied person, appointed by the president and confirmed by the tribal council.

ARTICLE XI — POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

SECTION 1. The Mescalero Apache Tribal Council shall have the following duties 
and powers subject to all applicable laws of the United States, this constitution, 
and the regulations of the Secretary of the Interior.

(a)  To veto the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal lands, inter
est in lands, or other tribal assets, that may be authorized by any agency of govern
ment without the consent of the tribe; and any encumbrance, sale, grant, or lease of 
any portion of the reservation, or the grant of any rights to the use of lands or 
other assets, or the grant of relinquishment of any water or mineral rights or other 
natural or fiscal assets of the Mescalero Reservation, are hereby reserved to the 
sanction of the tribal council.

(b)  To encumber, lease, permit, sell, assign, manage or provide for the management 
of tribal lands, interests in such lands or other tribal assets; to purchase or other
wise acquire lands or interests in lands within or without the reservation; and to re
gulate the use and disposition of tribal property of all kinds.

(c) To protect and preserve the property, wildlife and natural resources of the 

tribe, and to regulate the conduct of trade and the use and disposition of tribal 
property upon the reservation, provided that any ordinance directly affecting non
members of the tribe shall be subject to review by the Secretary of Interior.

(d)  To adopt and approve plans of operation to govern the conduct of any business 

or industry that will further the economic well-being of the members of the tribe, 
and to undertake any activity of any nature whatsoever, not inconsistent with Federal 
law or with this constitution, designed for the social or economic improvement of the 
Mescalero Apache people, such plans of operation and activities to be subject to re
view by the Secretary of the Interior.

-22-

(e)  To use tribal funds as loans or grants, and to transfer tribal property and 
other assets, to tribal corporations, associations, commissions or boards for such 
use as the tribal council may determine in conformity with this constitution and con 
sistent with applicable Federal laws and regulations.

(f) To authorize the president to negotiate contracts, leases and agreements of 
every description not inconsistent with Federal law or with this constitution, sub
ject to review or approval by the Secretary of the Interior where such review or ap
proval is required by statute or regulations; Provided, that all contracts, leases 
and agreements so negotiated shall be subject to approval by the tribal council.

(g)  To acquire, by condemnation, lands of tribal members on the reservation, for 

public purposes^ Provided that such members shall be reimbursed the full value of im 
provements they have placed on such lands as determined by appraisal. The manner of 
appraisal and the procedures governing condemnation shall be established by ordinance 
of the tribal council, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(h)  To regulate its own procedures, including the adoption and amendment of by- 
laws;to appoint subordinate boards, commissions, committees, tribal officials and em
ployees not otherwise provided for in this constitution and to prescribe their sala
ries, tenure and duties; to charter tribal corporations, and to charter and regulate 
other subordinate organizations for economic and other purposes, subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior when required by Federal law or regulation.

(i)  To represent the tribe and act in all matters that concern the welfare of the 
tribe and to make decisions not inconsistent with, or contrary to, this constitution.

(j) To negotiate with the Federal, State, or local Governments, and *o advise and 

consult with representatives of the Interior Department on all activities that may 
affect the reservation, and in regard to all appropriation estimates and Federal pro
jects for the benefit of the tribe before such estimates or projects are submitted to 
the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(k)  To borrow money from the Federal Government or other lenders for tribal use,

(1)  To administer any funds or property within the exclusive control of the tribe, 

and to make expenditures from available funds for public purposes of the tribe, in
cluding salaries and remuneration of elective officials, officers and tribal employ
ees. With the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, tribal funds from any 
source may be authorized for dividend or per capita payments to the members of the 
tribe.

(m)  To administer charity.

(n)  To make loans to tribal members in accordance with regulations of the Secre

tary of the Interior, this constitution and other applicable laws.

(o)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement of the rights of 
the tribe and its members, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, so long as such approval is required 
by Federal law.

(p)  To enact ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, es
tablishing and governing tribal courts and tribal law enforcement agencies on the re
servation; regulating social and domestic relations of members of the tribe; includ

-23-

ing provision for the issuance of decrees of divorce, provided that all marriages be 
tween tribal members shall be in conformity with applicable laws of the State; pro
viding for the appointment of guardians for minors and mental incompetents; regulat
ing the inheritance of personal property of tribal members; and providing for the re
moval or exclusion from the reservation of any non-members of the Mescalero Apache 
Tribe whose presence may be injurious to tribal members or to the interests of the 
tribe, as determined by the tribal council.

(q) To issue to each of its members a non-transferable certificate of membership, 
evidencing the equal share of each member in the assets of the tribe, said tribe be
ing in the nature of a non-profit corporation, and to use any net income return to 
the tribe from corporate enterprises for public and social purposes of the tribe,

(r)  To administer oaths; to require, upon proper notice being given stating time 
and place of hearing and the general nature of the subject to be discussed, any mem
ber of the tribe to appear and give testimony before the tribal council; and to pro
vide by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, for punish
ment of such members upon failure to comply with such requirements, or for giving 
false testimony,

(s)  To enact and provide for the enforcement of ordinances, subject to review by 

the Secretary of the Interior, for the assessment of taxes, licensing and other fees 
on persons or organizations doing business on the reservation,

(t)  No authority or power contained in this constitution may be delegated by the 
Mescalero Apache Tribal Council to tribal officials, committees, or associations to 
carry out any functions or do any thing for which primary responsibility is vested 
in the tribal council, except by ordinance or resolution duly enacted by the tribal 
council.

(u)  To deposit, to the credit of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, tribal funds, with

out limitation on the amount in any account, in any National or State bank whose de
posits are insured by any agency of the Federal Government; Provided, That advances 
to the tribe from funds held in trust in the United States Treasury shall be deposit
ed with a bonded disbursing officer of the united States whenever the conditions pre
scribed by the Secretary of the Interior in connection with such advance, require 
that the advance be so deposited,

(v) To exercise tribal powers independently, under this constitution, whenever 
limitations on such free exercise of tribal powers, imposed by regulations of the Se
cretary of the Interior, are removed; to exercise other inherent powers not hereto
fore exercised or included in this constitution; and to exercise powers which have 
been excluded from tribal authority by applicable statutes of Congress, in the event 
such statutes are amended or rescinded; Provided, That except for waiver of Secretar
ial review or approval authority, the exercise of additional tribal powers, by the 
tribal council, shall be in conformity with appropriate amendments to this constitu
tion, pursuant to the provisions of Article XV and Article XXVII hereof.

ARTICLE XII — REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF ENACTMENTS

SECTION 1, Every resolution or ordinance passed by the tribal council shall, be

fore it becomes effective, be presented to the president for approval within five 
(5) days following the date of its passage. If he approves he shall sign it within 
ten (10) days following its receipt and deposit it with the Secretary of the Mesca

-24-

lero Apache Tribe for such further action as may be necessary. If he does not sign 
an enactment of the tribal council, he shall, at the next meeting of the tribal coun
cil following its submittal to him for signature, return it to the tribal council 
with a statement of his objections. It shall thereafter not become effective unless 
it is again approved by two-thirds of the members present, providing that those pres
ent constitute a quorum of the tribal council.

SEC. 2. Every resolution or ordinance which, under this constitution is subject 

to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be, within ten (10) days following 
its approval by the president or, in the event of presidential veto, by a two-thirds 
majority of the tribal council as provided in Section 1 of Article XII above, pre
sented to the Superintendent of the Mescalero Reservation. Within ten (10) days af
ter receipt thereof, the Superintendent shall approve or disapprove the same.

SEC. 3. If the Superintendent shall approve any resolution or ordinance subject 

to review by the Secretary of the Interior, it shall thereupon become effective, but 
the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the 
Secretary of the Interior, who may within ninety (90) days from the date of such ap
proval by the Superintendent rescind the said resolution or ordinance for any cause, 
by transmitting notification to the President of the Mescalero Apache Tribe of such 
rescission.

SEC. 4. If the Superintendent shall refuse or fail to approve any resolution or 

ordinance submitted to him within ten (10) days after its receipt, he shall advise 
the tribal council of his reasons therefor, and if the reasons appear to the tribal 
council to be insufficient it may, by majority vote, refer the resolution or ordi
nance to the Secretary of the Interior who shall, within ninety (90) days from the 
date of receipt, approve or disapprove same in writing; Provided, however, that such 
resolution or ordinance shall become effective ninety (90) days after the date of re
ceipt unless the Secretary of the Interior shall disapprove in writing such resolut
tion or ordinance.

SEC, 5, Any resolution or ordinance that is, by the terms of this constitution, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the 
Superintendent who shall, within 10 days after receipt thereof, transmit the same to 
the Secretary of the Interior with his recommendation for or against approval.

SEC. 6, The said resolution or ordinance shall become effective when approved by 

the Secretary of the Interior.

SEC. 7. Upon request by the tribal council, the Secretary of the Interior may 
waive any requirement contained in this constitution relating to review or approval 
of resolutions and ordinances, or to the exercise of other powers of the tribal coun
cil, Such waiver shall be for such period of time and under such conditions as the 
Secretary of the Interior may prescribe.

ARTICLE XIII  — TRIBAL BUDGET AND BUSINESS ENTERPRISES

SECTION 1. Before the beginning of each fiscal year, the tribal council shall 
adopt and approve an annual tribal budget providing funds for the support of all ap
proved tribal programs. No expenditures of tribal funds may be made except in con
formity with the approved budget. The annual tribal budget shall be subject to such 
review and approval as may be required by the Secretary of the Interior.

SEC. 2. The Mescalero Apache Tribal Council shall, by ordinance, establish the

-25-

principles and policies governing the operation and control of all enterprises of the 
tribe.

ARTICLE XIV — REFERENDUM

SECTION 1. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of 
the qualified voters of the tribe and filed with the secretary of the tribal council 
demanding a referendum thereon, any proposed or enacted resolution, ordinance or oth
er action of the tribal council shall either be repealed by the tribal council or be 
submitted by it to the electorate for decision by the tribe in a general election to 
be held within thirty (30) days after receipt of the petition. The referendum shall 
be conclusive only if at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters cast 
their ballots therein.

SEC. 2. When a majority of the members of the tribal council shall request a re

ferendum on any proposed or enacted resolution, ordinance, or other action of the tri
bal council, the tribal council shall call an election within thirty (30) days there
after at which the members of the tribe shall approve or disapprove, by majority vote, 
the ordinance or action in question; Provided, however, that such approval or disap
proval shall be effective only in the event thirty percent (30%) or more of the quali
fied voters cast their ballots in such election.

SEC. 3. No referendum conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 1 above 
shall serve to abrogate, modify, or amend any properly approved contract or agreement 
with third parties who are not members of the Mescalero Apache Tribe.

ARTICLE XV  — CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT

SECTION 1. This constitution may be amended at an election called by the Secre

tary of the Interior upon request by the tribal council:

(a) Whenever, by majority vote of all members of the tribal council, 

the governing body of the tribe shall authorize the submission of 
a proposed amendment to the electorate of the tribe, or

(b) Whenever a minimum of thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters 

of the tribe, by signed petition, shall request such amendment,

SEC. 2. If, at such election, the amendment is adopted by majority vote of the 
qualified voters of the tribe voting therein, and if the number of ballots cast re
presents not less than thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters, such amendments 
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior and, if approved by him, it shall 
thereupon take effect,

ARTICLE XVI — SESSIONS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

SECTION 1. The tribal council shall meet, upon 24 hours written notice to the mem

bership thereof by the president, at the seat of tribal government, as provided in 
the by-laws; Provided, that not less than four (4) quarterly sessions shall be held 
in any year.

SEC. 2. Special sessions of the tribal council may be convened by the president 

or, if the president shall refuse to act, such special sessions may be convened by 
any three (3) members of the tribal council upon twenty-four (24) hours written no
tice signed by said three (3) members.

ARTICLE XVII  — QUORUM: VOTE

-26-

SECTION 1. Six (6) members of the tribal council shall constitute a quorum of the 

membership thereof, provided that the vice-president of the tribe may vote as a mem
ber of the tribal council throughout the whole of that meeting only if a quorum is 
not otherwise present. No enactment of the tribal council shall have any validity or 
effect in the absence of a quorum of the membership thereof.

SEC. 2. No resolution or ordinance of the tribal council shall have any validity 

or effect unless it is passed by the tribal council at a legally called session in 
which a quorum of the membership was present, and until approved by the president or 
passed over his veto as provided by Article XII.

ARTICLE XVIII — ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS

SECTION 1. All final decisions of the tribal council, on matters of permanent in
terest to members of the tribe and necessary to the orderly administration of tribal 
affairs, shall be embodied in ordinances, the format of which shall be established in 
the by-laws of the tribal council. Such enactments shall be available for public in
spection at all reasonable times by members of the tribe.

SEC. 2. All final decisions of the tribal council on matters of temporary inter

est, or matters relating to particular individuals, officials or circumstances shall 
be embodied in resolutions. Such actions of the tribal council shall also be subject 
to public inspection by members of the tribe.

ARTICLE XIX  — PART 2 — THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT: COMPOSITION 
 
 

AND MANNER OF SELECTION

 
 SECTION 1. The Executive Department of the Mescalero Apache Tribal Government 

shall consist of a president, a vice-president, a secretary and a treasurer.

SEC. 2. The President and Vice-President of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be 

elected. The remaining officers shall be appointed by the president with the con
currence of the tribal council, and persons appointed to fill such offices shall 
serve during the pleasure of the president, provided that the tribal council must con 
cur in the removal from office of any such appointive officer of the tribe.

ARTICLE XX  — PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT: TERM OF 
 
 

OFFICE AND QUALIFICATIONS

 
 SECTION 1. The President and Vice-President of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall 
be elected for a term of two (2) years. Candidates for the office of president and 
vice-president must possess the same qualifications required of candidates for coun
cil membership as set forth in Article VIII, Section 3 of this constitution. The 
term of office of the president and vice-president shall begin at the same time as 
the terms of members of the tribal council elected at the same election.

ARTICLE XXI — PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT: VACANCIES
 
 

AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 SECTION 1. In the event of a vacancy, for any cause, in the office of the presi
dent, the vice-president shall assume the duties of the president until a successor 
has been duly elected and qualified. In the event of a vacancy, for any cause, in 
the office of vice-president, such vacancy shall be filled by a tribal member appoint

-27-

ed by the tribal council, such person to serve until a successor has been duly elect
ed and qualified. In the event of a vacancy, for any cause, in both executive offi
ces, such vacancies shall be filled at a special election, called by the tribal coun
cil and conducted in conformity with applicable sections of Article IX of this con
stitution; except that the membership of the election board shall be appointed by the 
tribal council.

ARTICLE XXII  — DUTIES OF OFFICERS

SECTION 1. The President of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall exercise the follow

ing powers as the chief executive officer of the tribe:

(a) The president shall serve as the Chairman of the Mescalero Apache Tribal 
Council, but he shall not have the right to vote on any issue except to 
break a tie vote of the council in the absence of the vice-president.

(b) The president shall appoint all non-elected officials and employees of 

the executive department of the tribal government and shall direct them 
in their work, subject only to applicable restrictions embodied in this 
constitution or in enactments of the tribal council establishing person 
nel policies or governing personnel management,

(c)  The president, subject to the approval of the tribal council, may esta

blish such boards, committees or sub-committees as the business of the 
council may require, and shall serve as an ex-officio member of all such 
committees and boards.

(d)  The president shall serve as contracting officer for the Mescalero Apache 

Tribe, following approval of all contracts by the tribal council,

(e)  The president shall have veto power over enactments of the tribal coun

cil, as provided in Article XII, Section 1.

(f)  Subject to such regulations and procedures as may be prescribed by ordi

nance of the tribal council, the president shall have power to grant 
pardons, after conviction for all offenses, to restore tribal members to 
eligibility for elective office in the tribal government, subject to the 
restrictions contained in Article X, Section 1.

(g)  The president shall direct the tribal police, to assure the enforcement 

of ordinances of the tribal council.

(h)  The president shall hold no other tribal office or engage in private re

munerative employment without the consent of the tribal council, during 
his term as president,

SEC. 2. In the absence of the president, the vice-president shall preside and 

shall have all powers, privileges and duties of the president,

SEC, 3, The vice-president may function as chairman of the tribal council or of 

any committee thereof in the absence of, or at the direction of, the president. When 
presiding as chairman of the tribal council he shall have the right to vote only in 
the event the council or any committee thereof is equally divided on an issue. In 
his capacity as vice-president, he may be counted for purposes of constituting a 

-28-

quorum at any such meeting and when so counted may vote on any business then before 
the council.

SEC. 4. The vice-president may attend any session of the tribal council or of any 
council committee and he may participate therein, but he shall not have the right to 
vote unless required to make a quorum or to break a tie.

SEC. 5. The vice-president shall perform such other duties as the president, with 

the consent of the tribal council, may direct.
 
 

ARTICLE XXIII --- THE SECRETARY OF THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1. The Secretary of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be appointed from 

within the membership of the tribal council.

SEC. 2. The secretary shall call the roll, handle all official correspondence of 
the council, keep the minutes of all regular and special meetings of the tribal coun
cil, and it shall be his duty to submit promptly to the Superintendent of the agency 
copies of minutes of all regular and special meetings of the tribe -ninon.. Follow
ing each general election, the secretary shall certify to the Superindent of the 
reservation the duly elected president, vice - presidents and councilmembers In the ab
sence of the president and vice-president, the secretary shall carry G. the duties of 
the president, subject to all restrictions thereon embodied in this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XXIV -- TREASURER OF THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1. The treasurer shall be appointed from within the membership of the 

tribal council.

SEC. 2. 

(a) The treasurer shall accept, receipt for, keep and safeguard all funds
under the exclusive control of the tribe by depositing them in a bank insured by an 
agency of the Federal Government, or in an Individual Indian Money Account as direct
ed by the Mescalero Apache Tribal Council, and shall keep an accurate record of such 
funds and shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of 
all funds in his custody to the council at regular meetings and at such other times 
as requested by the council. He shall not pay or otherwise disburse any funds in cus
tody of the council except when properly authorized to do so by the council.

(b)  The books and records of the treasurer shall be audited at least once a 
year by a competent auditor employed by the council, and at such other 
times as the council may direct.

(c)  The treasurer shall be required to give a surety bond satisfactory to 

the council and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

(d)  The treasurer shall be present at all meetings of the council unless pre

vented by circumstances beyond his control.

(e)  All checks shall be signed and all vouchers shall be approved for payment 
by two officers of the tribe as follows: the president or the vice - 
president, together with the treasurer or, in his absence, the secre
tary.

(f)  In the absence of the president, vice-president, and secretary, the treasu

rer shall carry on the duties of the president.

-29-

SEC. 3. The tribal council may require all responsible tribal officials and em

ployees to be bonded. The premium for the bond shall be paid by the tribe.

ARTICLE XXV — PART III — THE JUDICIARY JUDICIAL POWERS

SECTION 1, The judicial powers of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be vested in 

the tribal court, including a trial and appellate court, which courts shall exercise 
jurisdiction in all criminal matters, except those matters within the exclusive juris
diction of the Federal and State Courts, wherein the defendants are members of the Mes
calero Apache Tribe or members of other Indian tribes residing within the Mescalero Re
servation; and may exercise jurisdiction in all civil matters wherein only members of 
the Mescalero Apache Tribe are involved.

SEC. 2. The criminal offenses over which the Courts of the Mescalero Apache Tribe 

have jurisdiction may be embodied in a Code of Laws, adopted by ordinance of the tri
bal council, and subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

SEC. 3. The duties and procedures of the courts shall be determined by ordinance 

of the tribal council,

ARTICLE XXVI — COMPOSITION OF THE TRIBAL COURTS

SECTION 1, The trial court shall consist of a chief judge and two associate judges 

appointed by the President of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, with the concurrence of not 
less than a three-fourths majority vote of the whole membership of the tribal council,

SEC, 2, The tribal council shall sit as a court of appeals whenever necessary and 

may hear appeals at any regular or special meeting,

SEC. 3. The tenure and salary of tribal judges shall be established by ordinance 

of the tribal council.

SEC. 4. No person shall be appointed to the office of tribal judge unless he is 
an enrolled member of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, not less than 35 years nor more than 
70 years of age; nor shall any person be appointed as a tribal judge who has ever been 
convicted of a felony or, within one year, the last past, of a misdemeanor,

ARTICLE XXVII — INHERENT POWERS OF THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

SECTION 1, No provision of this constitution shall be construed as a limitation 

on the inherent residual sovereign powers of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, Any such 
powers, not delegated to the representative tribal government by this constitution, 
are retained for direct exercise by the people through referendum, as provided for 
herein, or for exercise by the tribal government following amendment of the constitu
tion,

ARTICLE XXVIII — SAVING CLAUSE AND REPEAL OF PREVIOUS CONSTITUTION

SECTION 1, The Constitution and By-laws of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Re

servation, approved on March 25, 1936, under the provisions of Section 16 of the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat, 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat,378), 
is hereby repealed and superseded by this constitution,

SEC. 2. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the Mescalero Tribal

-30-

Business Committee shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they are 
not inconsistent with this constitution.

SEC. 3. The incumbent tribal business committee and incumbent tribal officers 
shall remain in office and shall be entitled to exercise all powers granted by this 
constitution to the tribal council and tribal officers until such time as the first 
election of the tribal council and tribal officers is held under this constitution.

ARTICLE XXIX — OATH OF OFFICE

SECTION 1. No elective official of the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be official

ly installed in the office to which such official is elected unless and until the 
following; oath has been duly administered by a Judge of the Mescalero Apache Tribal 
Court;

”I, __________________________ , do solemnly swear that I will support
and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies; 
that I will faithfully and impartially carry out the duties of my of
fice, uphold the Constitution of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, and rep
resent the interests of the Mescalero Apache people, These things I 
will do to the best of my ability, so help me God.”

ARTICLE XXX — RATIFICATION OF REVISED CONSTITUTION

SECTION 1. This constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified 

voters of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, voting at an election called for that purpose 
by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those en
titled to vote shall cast their ballots, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the 
Interior for his approval, and shall be effective from the date of approval.

***
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Secretary of the Interior on December 

11, 1964, the attached Revised Constitution of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Re
servation was submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe and was on December 18, 
1964, duly adopted by a vote of 190 for and 103 against, in an election in which at 
least 30 percent of the 635 members entitled to vote cast their ballot in accordance 
with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

KENNETH L. PAYTON
Chairman, Election Board
 
  
  
  
  
 

CHRISTIE LA PAZ

 
 Election Board Member 
 

ALTON PESO

 
 Election Board Member 
 

APPROVAL

 
 -31-

I, John A. Carver, Jr., Under Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 
America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, :.934 (48 Stat. 
984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Revised Constitution of the Apache 
Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation,

Approval recommended:

JAMES E. OFFICER
Associate Commissioner
Bureau of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C., January 12, 1965.

JOHN A. CARVER, JR.
Under Secretary of the Interior

[SEAL]

