 
  
 REVISED CONSTITUTION 
 

MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

MESCALERO RESERVATION

NEW MEXICO

 
 APPROVED MARCH 25, 1936

REVISED JANUARY 12, 1965

As Amended

Through May 31, 1985


UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

REVISED 
CONSTITUTION OF THE APACHE TRIBE 

 
  
 of the  
 
MESCALERO INDIAN RESERVATION 
NEW MEXICO

 
 APPROVED MARCH 25, 1936
REVISED JANUARY 12, 1965
 
  
  
 

REVISED
CONSTITUTION OF THE APACHE TRIBE 
 
 of the 
 
MESCALERO RESERVATION

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Apache Tribe of the 
Mescalero Reservation, in order to promote justice, insure 
tranquility, encourage the general welfare, foster the social 
and economic advancement of our people, safeguard our 
interests, bring our representative tribal government into 
closer alignment with State and National governments, and 
secure for ourselves and for our posterity the blessings of 
freedom and liberty, do hereby establish this revised 
constitution as the foundation upon which our tribal 
government shall rest.
 
 

ARTICLE I - THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1. The Apache Tribe of the Mescalero 
Reservation, hereinafter referred to as the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe, shall include all persons recognized as 
members thereof, or upon whom membership may be 
conferred, pursuant to the provisions and restrictions 
imposed by Article IV of this constitution, irrespective of 
the Apache Band with which they may be identified.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 SECTION 1. The jurisdiction of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe, its tribal council and courts shall extend to 
all the territory within the exterior boundaries of the 
reservation, and to such other lands as may be added 
thereto by purchase, gift, Act of Congress, or otherwise.
 
 

ARTICLE III - RESERVATION

 
 SECTION 1. Title to reservation lands shall remain 
tribal property and shall not, in whole or in part, be 
granted by allotment or otherwise to tribal members or 
groups of members as private property. The control of 
reservation lands, and of assignments or leases thereof, and 
of other tribal property, shall be in the tribal council, 
subject to applicable Federal authority, and regulated by 

1

ordinances not inconsistent with or contrary to this 
constitution.

SECTION 2. The tribal council shall have power to 
assign unused tribal lands, or to reassign any unused 
assignments, or portions thereof, which have been idle for 
two (2) or more years. No reassignment of a homestead may 
be made so long as the original assignee shall reside on the 
homesite, unless he shall voluntarily release the homesite to 
the tribe. A member may transfer his homesite to one of 
his children. The tribal council shall decide by ordinance 
what shall constitute a unit for purposes of assignment of 
land for private use, and shall determine the rules 
governing the use and transfer of such assignments.

SECTION 3. A non-member who is the surviving 
spouse of a member of the tribe shall have the privilege to 
use an assignment for the benefit of enrolled minor 
children, but a non-member shall not acquire any vested 
interest or rights in any tribal property, except as otherwise 
provided by ordinance of the tribal council, or by 
applicable Federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1.  The membership of the Mescalero Apache 

Tribe shall consist of the following persons:

(a)  Any person whose name appeared on the 
Census Roll of the Mescalero Apache Agency of 
January 1, 1936.
(b)  All persons born to resident members after 
the census of January 1, 1936, and prior to the 
effective date of this constitution.
(c)  Any child born to a non-resident member, 
prior to the effective date of this constitution, 
provided that such child shall have resided on 
the Mescalero Reservation for not less than one 
(1) year immediately preceding the date of 
enrollment.
(d)  Any person of one-fourth degree or more 
Mescalero Apache blood, born after the effective 
date of this constitution, either one or both of 
whose parents is (are) enrolled in the 
membership of the Mescalero Apache Tribe.
[Section 1 as amended February 3, 1981]

2

SECTION 2. 

No person, being enrolled or 
recognized as a member of another tribe, shall be eligible 
for enrollment in the Mescalero Apache Tribe.

SECTION 3. 

The tribal council shall have the 
power to adopt ordinances, consistent with this constitution, 
governing future membership, loss of membership, and the 
adoption of members into the Mescalero Apache Tribe, 
which ordinances shall be subject to review by the 
Secretary of Interior.

SECTION 4. The tribal council shall have the 
power to prescribe rules to govern the compilation and 
maintenance of a membership roll, and to make corrections 
in the basic roll, subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior.

SECTION 5. The constitution of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe, and ordinances enacted pursuant thereto, 
shall govern tribal membership and enrollment. No decree 
of any non-tribal court purporting to determine membership 
in the tribe, determine paternity, or determine the degree of 
Indian blood, shall be recognized for membership purposes. 
The tribal council shall have sole authority and original 
jurisdiction to determine eligibility for enrollment, except 
where the membership of an individual is dependent upon 
an issue of paternity, in which case the trial court, or the 
tribal council sitting as an appellate court, shall have 
authority and exclusive jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE V - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1. Subject to the limitations prescribed by 
this constitution, all members of the Mescalero Apache 
Tribe shall have equal political rights and equal 
opportunities to participate in the economic resources and 
tribal assets, and no member shall be denied freedom of 
conscience, speech, religion, association or assembly, nor 
shall he be denied the right to petition the tribal council 
for the redress of grievances against the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - DISQUALIFICATION OF TRIBAL 
MEMBERS FOR ELECTIVE OFFICE

 
 SECTION 1. No person who has been convicted of 
any felony or other serious offense, including adultery, 
bribery, embezzlement, extortion, fraud, forgery, 
misbranding, perjury, theft, habitual drunkenness, or 
felonious assault or felonious battery, shall be eligible for 

3

candidacy to any elective office of the Mescalero Apache 
Tribe unless he shall have been pardoned by the President 
of the Mescalero Apache Tribe in conformity with 
applicable ordinances and procedures prescribed by the trial 
council.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ORGANIZATION OF THE 
GOVERNMENT
OF THE MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1. The powers of the government of the 
Mescalero Apache Tribe are divided into three distinct 
departments, the Legislative, the Executive and the Judicial, 
and no person or group of persons charged with the exercise 
of powers properly belonging to one of these departments, 
shall exercise any powers properly belonging to either of 
the others, except as this constitution may otherwise 
expressly direct or permit.
 
  
  
 

ARTICLE VIII - PART I - THE LEGISLATIVE 
 
 DEPARTMENT: 
 
COMPOSITION AND QUALIFICATIONS

 
 SECTION 1.  The legislative powers of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe shall rest in the Mescalero Apache Tribal 
Council, hereinafter referred to as the tribal council, which 
shall hold its sessions at the seat of the tribal government.

SECTION 2.  The tribal council shall consist of eight 
(8) members, elected at large from the membership of the 
Mescalero Apache Tribe.

SECTION 3. The members of the tribal council shall 
be at least twenty-five (25) years of age at the time of 
election or appointment (Article X, Section 4); shall have 
one-quarter or more Mescalero Apache Indian blood; shall 
have resided on the Mescalero Apache Reservation for a 
period of at least six (6) months immediately prior to the 
election, and shall be subject to the restrictions set out in 
Article VI.

SECTION 4. No person shall serve as a member of 
the Mescalero Apache Tribal Council while holding any 
other elective office, or policy making position with the 
tribe or with any organization doing business on the 
Mescalero Reservation.

4
 
 

ARTICLE IX - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

 
 SECTION 1.  An election board, appointed by the 
president of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, shall supervise 
and administer all elections in accordance with established 
tribal ordinances, and in conformity with this constitution; 
provided that no member of the election board shall be at 
the same time a member of the tribal council or a candidate 
for tribal office, and provided further that persons so 
appointed by the president shall be confirmed by the tribal 
council.

SECTION 2.  Any member of the Mescalero Apache 
Tribe shall have the right to vote in any tribal election 
provided such member:

(a) 

Is at least eighteen (18) years of age at the time 

of such election. [As amended December 16, 1977]

(b) 

Has resided within a fifty (50) mile radius of 
the Tribal Administration Office, which office is located on the 
reservation for a period of at least six (6) months immediately 
prior to the day of election. [Deleted December 16, 1977; 
added as amendment December 17, 1982]

SECTION 3.  Members of the tribal council, and all 
other elective officials of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, shall 
be chosen by secret ballot, the form of which shall be 
established by ordinance enacted by the tribal council.

SECTION 4.  The tribal council, by ordinance, shall 
make provision for absentee voting, including the use of a 
secret ballot for this purpose.

SECTION 5.  No member of the Mescalero Apache 
Tribe shall be deprived of his right to vote, if otherwise 
qualified, because of temporary absence from the 
reservation. Temporary absence shall be defined, for 
purposes of this selection, as follows:

Absence for the purpose of attending 
(a) 
an educational institution for purposes of 
obtaining formal training, or
Absence for purposes of receiving 
(b) 
treatment at a regular hospital, clinic or 
sanitarium, or
(c) 
Armed Forces of the United States, or
Absence for purposes of obtaining 
(d) 
additional educational training in regularly 
held training sessions, or
Absence for any other reason which 
(e) 
does not exceed six (6) months’ duration, 

Absence for purposes of service in the

5

immediately preceding a tribal election, 
without return to the physical limits of the 
reservation.
SECTION 6. Any qualified member of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe who desires that his (her) name be placed on 
the ballot as a candidate for the office of president, vice
president or council member in the primary election shall 
file with the tribal secretary a statement of intention 
showing his (her) name and the office for which he (she) 
desires to become a candidate. Such statement shall be filed 
not less than fifteen (15) days preceding the primary 
election.

If the number of candidates filing for 

SECTION 7.
A primary election to select candidates 
(a) 
for the office of the president, vice-president 
and council members shall be held at least thirty 
(30) days before the general election of the 
Tribe. The two nominees receiving the highest 
number of votes for president shall be the only 
candidates for the office of president at the 
next general election. The two nominees 
receiving the highest number of votes for vice
president shall be the only candidates for vice
president in the next general election. The eight 
nominees receiving the highest number of votes, 
for council member shall be the only candidates 
for council members in the next general election.
(b) 
president, vice-president or a position on the 
council is such that a primary election would not 
serve to eliminate any candidates for a given 
position then such candidates shall be the 
candidates in the general election.
(c) 
office or position only when there are more 
candidates than are allowed in the general 
election, and the ballots shall be limited to the 
offices or positions where an elimination of 
candidates must take place. [Section 7 as 
amended December 17, 1982]
SECTION 8. General Elections to vote for Tribal 
Council Members and all elected officers of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe shall be held annually on the first Tuesday in 
November. Notice of both the primary and general elections 
shall be posted at least thirty (30) days before each such 
election at the voting place and in three (3) or more additional 

A Primary election shall be held for an 

6

public places. Such notice shall be posted by the Secretary of 
the Tribal Council. [As amended December 17, 1982]

SECTION 9. No candidate shall be permitted to 
withdraw except by filing a written notice thereof with the 
tribal secretary at least twelve (12) days before the primary 
and the general election. The tribal secretary shall post the 
names of all candidates at the voting place, and at three or 
more additional public places at least ten (10) days before 
the primary and general election.

SECTION 10. The first election of tribal council 
members and officers under this constitution shall be held 
on the first general election date following its adoption and 
ratification. The candidate with the highest number of 
votes for the office of president shall hold the office for 
two (2) years. The candidate with the highest number of 
votes for the office of vice-president shall hold that office 
for two (2) years. The four candidates receiving the highest 
number of votes for council member-at-large shall hold 
office for two (2) years. The four candidates receiving the 
next highest number of votes for council member-at-large 
shall hold office for one (1) year. Tie votes shall be 
decided by lot. The term of office for these newly elected 
council members shall start on the second Friday of the 
month of January following the election, at which time the 
incumbent business committee will be dissolved.

SECTION 11. Succeeding members of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribal Council shall be elected to serve for a term 
of two (2) years, with one-half of the members-at-large 
thereof elected each year. The term of office of newly 
elected members shall start on the second Friday of the 
month of January following the election.

SECTION 12. The candidate receiving the highest 
number of votes at the general election for the office of 
president shall become the president. The candidate 
receiving the highest number of votes at the general 
election for the office of vice-president shall become the 
vice-president.

SECTION 13. The four candidates for the office of 
councilman-at-large receiving the highest number of votes 
cast in each general election, and the winning candidates 
for the office of president and vice-president, shall be 
certified to the tribal council by the election board as the 
duly elected councilmen and officers of the tribe.

SECTION 14. No person shall be a candidate for 

more than one office in any primary election.

7

SECTION 15. Any tie vote shall be decided by lot 

before the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE X - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM 
OFFICE

 
 SECTION 1. Any member of the tribal council or 
elected officer of the Mescalero Apache Tribe who, during 
the term for which he is elected, is convicted of any felony, 
shall automatically forfeit his office. Any member of the 
tribal council or elected officer found guilty of a 
misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, gross neglect of 
duty, malfeasance in office or misconduct reflecting on the 
dignity and integrity of the tribal government, may be 
removed from office by majority vote of the tribal council. 
Before any vote for removal from office is taken, such 
member or officer shall be given a written statement of the 
charges against him at least five (5) days before the meeting 
of the tribal council before which he is to appear, and he 
shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all charges 
at the designated council meeting. The decision of the 
tribal council shall be final.

SECTION 2. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at 
least twenty-five percent (25%) of the eligible voters 
demanding recall of any member of the tribal council, or 
elected officer, filed with the secretary of the tribal council 
at least four (4) months before the expiration of such 
council member’s, or official’s, term of office, it shall be 
the duty of the tribal council to call a special election upon 
the question of recall. Such election shall be held not less 
than twenty-five (25) nor more than forty (40) days from 
the filing of the petition. No council member or elected 
officer may be recalled unless a majority of the members 
voting vote in favor of the recall, and unless at least thirty 
percent (30%) of the eligible voters vote in the election.

SECTION 3. If a member of the tribal council fails 
to attend two (2) successive meetings of the tribal council or 
a committee thereof, of which he is a member, or any 
combination of tribal council or such committee meetings, 
he shall automatically cease to be a member of the tribal 
council. In such event, the tribal council shall declare the 
position vacant and the president shall, subject to 
confirmation by the tribal council, appoint a successor to 
serve the unexpired term, unless such member

(a) Is excused by the tribal council, or

8

(b) Is absent by reason of illness, or due to 
reasons beyond his control, which are 
satisfactory to the tribal council.
SECTION 4. In the event of a vacancy, for any 
cause, in the membership of the tribal council, the 
unexpired term corresponding to the vacancy shall be filled 
by a qualified person, appointed by the president and 
confirmed by the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. The Mescalero Apache Tribal Council 
shall have the following duties and powers subject to all 
applicable laws of the United States, this constitution, and 
the regulations of the Secretary of the Interior.

(a) To veto the sale, disposition, lease, or 
encumbrance of tribal lands, interest in lands, 
or other tribal assets, that may be authorized 
by any agency of government without the 
consent of the tribe; and any encumbrance 
sale, grant, or lease of any portion of the 
reservation, or the grant of any rights to use 
of lands or other assets, or the grant of 
relinquishment of any water or mineral rights 
or other natural or fiscal assets of the 
Mescalero Reservation, are hereby reserved to 
the sanction of the tribal council.
(b) To encumber, lease, permit, sell, assign, 
manage or provide for the management of 
tribal lands, interests in such lands or other 
tribal assets; to purchase or otherwise acquire 
lands or interests in lands within or without 
the reservation; and to regulate the use and 
disposition of tribal property of all kinds.
(c) To protect and preserve the property, 
wildlife and natural resources of the tribe, 
and to regulate the conduct of trade and the 
use and disposition of tribal property upon 
the reservation, provided that any ordinance 
directly affecting non-members of the tribe 
shall be subject to review by the Secretary of 
Interior.
(d)  To adopt and approve plans of operation 
to govern the conduct of any business or 
industry that will further the economic well
being of the members of the tribe, and to 

9

undertake any activity of any nature 
whatsoever, not inconsistent with Federal law 
or with this constitution, designed for the 
social or economic improvement of the 
Mescalero Apache people, such plans of 
operation and activities to be subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior.
(e) To use tribal funds as loans or grants, and 
to transfer tribal property and other assets, to 
tribal corporations, associations, commissions 
or boards for such use as the tribal council 
may determine in conformity with this 
constitution and consistent with applicable 
Federal laws and regulations.
(f) To authorize the president to negotiate 
contracts, leases and agreements of every 
description not inconsistent with Federal law 
or with this constitution, subject to review or 
approval by the Secretary of the Interior 
where such review or approval is required by 
statute or regulations; Provided, that all 
contracts, leases and agreements so negotiated 
shall be subject to approval by the tribal 
council.
(g) To acquire, by condemnation, lands of 
tribal members on the reservation, for public 
purposes, provided that such members shall be 
reimbursed the full value of improvements 
they have placed on such lands as determined 
by appraisal. The manner of appraisal and the 
procedures governing condemnation shall be 
established by ordinance of the tribal council, 
subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior.
(h) To regulate its own procedures, including 
the adoption and amendment of bylaws; to 
appoint subordinate boards, commissions, 
committees, tribal officials and employees not 
otherwise provided for in this constitution 
and to prescribe their salaries, tenure and 
duties; to charter tribal corporations, and to 
charter and regulate other subordinate 
organizations for economic and other 
purposes, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior when required by Federal law 
or regulation.

10

(i) To represent the tribe and act in all 
matters that concern the welfare of the tribe 
and to make decisions not inconsistent with, 
or contrary to, this constitution.
(j) To negotiate with the Federal, State, or 
local Governments, and to advise and consult 
with representatives of the Interior 
Department on all activities that may affect 
the reservation, and in regard to all 
appropriation estimates and Federal projects 
for the benefit of the tribe before such 
estimates or projects are submitted to the 
Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.
(k) To borrow money from the Federal
Government or other lenders for tribal use.
(1) To administer any funds or property 
within the exclusive control of the tribe, and 
to make expenditures from available funds 
for public purposes of the tribe, including 
salaries and remuneration of elective 
officials, officers and tribal employees. With 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
tribal funds from any source may be 
authorized for dividend or per capita 
payments to the members of the tribe.
(m) To administer charity.
(n) To make loans to tribal members in 
accordance with regulations of the Secretary 
of the Interior, this constitution and other 
applicable laws.
(o) To employ legal counsel for the 
protection and advancement of the rights of 
the tribe and its members, the choice of 
counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, so 
long as such approval is required by Federal 
law.
(p) To enact ordinances, subject to review b 
the Secretary of the Interior, establishing and 
governing tribal courts and tribal law 
enforcement agencies on the reservation; 
regulating social and domestic relations of 
members of the tribe; including provision for 
the issuance of decrees of divorce, provided 
that all marriages between tribal members 
shall be in conformity with applicable laws of 

11

the State; providing for the appointment of 
guardians for minors and mental 
incompetents; regulating the inheritance of 
personal property of tribal members; and 
providing for the removal or exclusion from 
the reservation of any non-members of the 
Mescalero Apache Tribe whose presence may 
be injurious to tribal members or to the 
interests of the tribe, as determined by the 
tribal council.
(q) To issue to each of its members a non- 
transferable certificate of membership, 
evidencing the equal share of each member in 
the assets of the tribe, said tribe being in the 
nature of a non-profit corporation, and to use 
any net income return to the tribe from 
corporate enterprises for public and social 
purposes of the tribe.
To administer oaths; to require, upon 
(r) 
proper notice being given stating time and 
place of hearing and the general nature of the 
subject to be discussed, any member of the 
tribe to appear and give testimony before the 
tribal council; and to provide by ordinance, 
subject to review by the Secretary of Interior, 
for punishment of such members upon failure 
to comply with such requirements, or for 
giving false testimony.
To enact and provide for the enforcement 
(s) 
of ordinances, subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, for the assessment 
of taxes, licensing and other fees on persons 
or organizations doing business on the 
reservation.
(t)  No authority or power contained in this 
constitution may be delegated by the 
Mescalero Apache Tribal Council to tribal 
officials, committees, or associations to carry 
out any functions or do any thing for which 
primary responsibility is vested in the tribal 
council, except by ordinance or resolution 
duly enacted by the tribal council.
(u)  To deposit, to the credit of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe, tribal funds, without limitation 
on the amount in any account, in any 
National or State bank whose deposits are 

12

insured by any agency of the Federal 
Government; Provided, that advances to the 
tribe from funds held in trust in the United 
States Treasury shall be deposited with a 
bonded disbursing officer of the United 
States whenever the conditions prescribed by 
the Secretary of the Interior in connection 
with such advance, require that the advance 
be so deposited.
(v)  To exercise tribal powers independently, 
under this constitution, whenever limitations 
on such free exercise of tribal powers, 
imposed by regulations of the Secretary of the 
Interior, are removed; to exercise other 
inherent powers not heretofore exercised or 
included in this constitution; and to exercise 
powers which have been excluded from tribal 
authority by applicable statutes of Congress, 
in the event such statutes are amended or 
rescinded; provided, that except for waiver of 
Secretarial review or approval authority, the 
exercise of additional tribal powers, by the 
tribal council, shall be in conformity with 
appropriate amendments to this constitution, 
pursuant to the provisions of Article XV and 
Article XXVII hereof.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF 
ENACTMENTS

 
 SECTION 1. Every resolution or ordinance passed 
by the tribal council shall, before it becomes effective, be 
presented to the president for approval within five (5) days 
following the date of its passage. If he approves he shall 
sign it within ten (10) days following its receipt and deposit 
it with the Secretary of the Mescalero Apache Tribe for 
such further action as may be necessary. If he does not 
sign an enactment of the tribal council, he shall, at the next 
meeting of the tribal council following its submittal to him 
for signature, return it to the tribal council with a 
statement of his objections. It shall thereafter not become 
effective unless it is again approved by two-thirds of the 
members present, providing that those present constitute a 
quorum of the tribal council.

SECTION 2. Every resolution or ordinance which, 
under this constitution is subject to review by the Secretary 

13

of the Interior, shall be, within ten (10) days following its 
approval by the president or, in the event of presidential 
veto, by a two-thirds majority of the tribal council as 
provided in Section 1 of Article XII above, presented to the 
Superintendent of the Mescalero Reservation. Within ten 
(10) days after receipt thereof, the Superintendent shall 
approve or disapprove the same.

SECTION 3. If the Superintendent shall approve any 
resolution or ordinance subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, it shall thereupon become effective, but the 
Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing 
his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may 
within ninety (90) days from the date of such approval by 
the Superintendent rescind the said resolution or ordinance 
for any cause, by transmitting notification to the President 
of the Mescalero Apache Tribe of such rescission.

SECTION 4. If the Superintendent shall refuse or 
fail to approve any resolution or ordinance submitted to 
him within ten (10) days after its receipt, he shall advise 
the tribal council of his reasons therefor, and if the reasons 
appear to the tribal council to be insufficient it may, by 
majority vote, refer the resolution or ordinance to the 
Secretary of the Interior who shall, within ninety (90) days 
from the date of receipt, approve or disapprove same in 
writing; Provided, however, that such resolution or 
ordinance shall become effective ninety (90) days after the 
date of receipt unless the Secretary of the Interior shall 
disapprove in writing such resolution or ordinance.

SECTION 5.  Any resolution or ordinance that is, by 
the terms of this constitution, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the 
Superintendent who shall, within 10 days after receipt 
thereof, transmit the same to the Secretary of the Interior 
with his recommendation for or against approval.

SECTION 6.  The said resolution or ordinance shall 
become effective when approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

SECTION 7.  Upon request by the tribal council, the 
Secretary of the Interior may waive any requirement 
contained in this constitution relating to review or approval 
of resolutions and ordinances, or to the exercise of other 
powers of the tribal council. Such waiver shall be for such 
period of time and under such conditions as the Secretary 
of the Interior may prescribe.

14
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - TRIBAL BUDGET AND BUSINESS 
ENTERPRISES

 
 SECTION 1.  Before the beginning of each fiscal 
year, the tribal council shall adopt and approve an annual 
tribal budget providing funds for the support of all 
approved tribal programs. No expenditures of tribal funds 
may be made except in conformity with the approved 
budget. The annual tribal budget shall be subject to such 
review and approval as may be required by the Secretary of 
the Interior.

SECTION 2.  The Mescalero Apache Tribal Council 
shall, by ordinance, establish the principles and policies 
governing the operation and control of all enterprises of the 
tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - REFERENDUM

 
 SECTION 1. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters of the 
tribe and filed with the secretary of the tribal council 
demanding a referendum thereon, any proposed or enacted 
resolution, ordinance or other action of the tribal council 
shall either be repealed by the tribal council or be 
submitted by it to the electorate for decision by the tribe in 
a general election to be held within thirty (30) days after 
receipt of the petition. The referendum shall be conclusive 
only if at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters 
cast their ballots therein.

SECTION 2. When a majority of the members of the 
tribal council shall request a referendum on any proposed 
or enacted resolution, ordinance, or other action of the 
tribal council, the tribal council shall call an election 
within thirty (30) days thereafter at which the members of 
the tribe shall approve or disapprove, by majority vote, the 
ordinance or action in question; Provided, however, that 
such approval or disapproval shall be effective only in the 
event thirty percent (30%) or more of the qualified voters 
cast their ballots in such election.

SECTION 3.  No referendum conducted pursuant to 
the provisions of Section 1 above shall serve to abrogate, 
modify, or amend any properly approved contract or 
agreement with third parties who are not members of the 
Mescalero Apache Tribe.

15
 
 

ARTICLE XV - CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT

 
 SECTION 1. This constitution may be amended at 
an election called by the Secretary of the Interior upon 
request by the tribal council:

(a)  Whenever, by majority vote of all 
members of the tribal council, the governing 
body of the tribe shall authorize the 
submission of a proposed amendment to the 
electorate of the tribe, or
(b)  Whenever a minimum of thirty percent 
(30%) of the qualified voters of the tribe, by 
signed petition, shall request such amendment. 
SECTION 2. If, at such election, the amendment is 
adopted by majority vote of the qualified voters of the 
tribe voting therein, and if the number of ballots cast 
represents not less than thirty percent (30%) of the 
qualified voters, such amendments shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of Interior and, if approved by him, it shall 
thereupon take effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - SESSIONS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. The tribal council shall meet, upon 24 
hours written notice to the membership thereof by the 
president, at the seat of tribal government, as provided in 
the bylaws; Provided, that no less than four (4) quarterly 
sessions shall be held in any year.

SECTION 2. Special sessions of the tribal council 
may be convened by the president or, if the president shall 
refuse to act, such special sessions may be convened by any 
three (3) members of the tribal council upon twenty-four 
(24) hours written notice signed by said three (3) members.

ARTICLE XVII - QUORUM; VOTE

SECTION 1. Six (6) members of the tribal council 
shall constitute a quorum of the membership thereof, 
provided that the vice-president of the tribe may vote as a 
member of the tribal council throughout the whole of that 
meeting only if a quorum is not otherwise present. No 
enactment of the tribal council shall have any validity or 
effect in the absence of a quorum of the membership 
thereof.

SECTION 2. No resolution or ordinance of the triba 
council shall have any validity or effect unless it is passed 

16

by the tribal council at a legally called session in which a 
quorum of the membership was present, and until approved 
by the president or passed over his veto as provided by 
Article XII.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS

 
 SECTION 1. All final decisions of the tribal 
council, on matters of permanent interest to members of the 
tribe and necessary to the orderly administration of tribal 
affairs, shall be embodied in ordinances, the format of 
which shall be established in the bylaws of the tribal 
council. Such enactments shall be available for public 
inspection at all reasonable times by members of the Tribe.

SECTION 2. All final decisions of the tribal council 
on matters of temporary interest, or matters relating to 
particular individuals, officials or circumstances shall be 
embodied in resolutions. Such actions of the tribal council 
shall also be subject to public inspection by members of the 
tribe.

ARTICLE XIX - PART 2 - THE EXECUTIVE 
DEPARTMENT:
 
 
COMPOSITION AND MANNER OF SELECTION

 
 SECTION 1. The Executive Department of the 
Mescalero Apache Tribal Government shall consist of a 
president, a vice-president, a secretary and a treasurer.

SECTION 2. The President and Vice-President of 
the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be elected. The remaining 
officers shall be appointed by the president with the 
concurrence of the tribal council, and persons appointed to 
fill such offices shall serve during the pleasure of the 
president, provided that the tribal council must concur in 
the removal from office of any appointive officer of the 
tribe.

ARTICLE XX - PRESIDENT AND VICE-PRESIDENT:
 
 
TERM OF OFFICE AND QUALIFICATIONS

 
 SECTION 1. The President and Vice-President of 
the Mescalero Apache Tribe shall be elected for a term of 
two (2) years. Candidates for the office of president and 
vice-president must possess the same qualifications required 
of candidates for council membership as set forth in Article 
VIII, Section 3 of this constitution. The term of office of 

17

the president and vice-president shall begin at the same 
time as the terms of members of the tribal council elected 
at the same election.
 
  
  
 

ARTICLE XXI - PRESIDENT AND VICE

 
 PRESIDENT: 
 
VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 SECTION 1. In the event of a vacancy, for any 
cause, in the office of the president, the vice-president shall 
assume the duties of the president until a successor has been 
duly elected and qualified. In the event of a vacancy, for 
any cause, in the office of the vice-president, such vacancy 
shall be filled by a tribal member appointed by the tribal 
council, such person to serve until a successor has been duly 
elected and qualified. In the event of a vacancy, for any 
cause, in both executive offices, such vacancies shall be 
filled at a special election, called by the tribal council and 
conducted in conformity with applicable sections of Article 
IX of this constitution; except that the membership of the 
election board shall be appointed by the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE XXII - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 SECTION 1.  The President of the Mescalero Apache 
Tribe shall exercise the following powers as the chief 
executive officer of the tribe:

(a)  The president shall serve as the Chairman 
of the Mescalero Apache Tribal Council, but 
he shall not have the right to vote on any 
issue except to break a tie vote of the council 
in the absence of the vice-president.
(b)  The president shall appoint all non
elected officials and employees of the 
executive department of the tribal 
government and shall direct them in their 
work, subject only to applicable restrictions 
embodied in this constitution or in enactments 
of the tribal council establishing personnel 
policies or governing personnel management.
(c)  The president, subject to the approval of 
the tribal council, may establish such boards, 
committees or sub-committees as the business 
of the council may require, and shall serve as 
an ex-officio member of all such committees 
and boards.

18

(d) The president shall serve as contracting 
officer for the Mescalero Apache Tribe, 
following approval of all contracts by the 
tribal council.
(e) The president shall have veto power over 
enactments of the tribal council, as provided 
in Article XII, Section 1.
(f) Subject to such regulations and 
procedures a may be prescribed by ordinance 
of the tribal council, the president shall have 
power to grant pardon, after conviction for 
all offenses, to restore tribal members to 
eligibility for elective office in the tribal 
government, subject to the restrictions 
contained in Article X, Section 1.
(g) The president shall direct the tribal 
police, to assure the enforcement of 
ordinances of the tribal council.
(h) The president shall hold no other tribal 
office or engage in private remunerative 
employment without the consent of the tribal 
council, during his term as president.
SECTION 2. 

In the absence of the president, the 
vice-president shall preside and shall have all powers, 
privileges and duties of the president.

SECTION 3. 

The vice-president may function as 
chairman of the tribal council or of any committee thereof 
in the absence of, or at the direction of, the president. 
When presiding as chairman of the tribal council he shall 
have the right to vote only in the event the council or any 
committee thereof is equally divided on an issue. In his 
capacity as vice-president, he may be counted for purposes 
of constituting a quorum at any such meeting and when so 
counted may vote on any business then before the council.

SECTION 4. 

The vice-president may attend any 
session of the tribal council or of any council committee 
and he may participate therein, but he shall not have the 
right to vote unless required to make a quorum or to break 
a tie.

SECTION 5. 

The vice-president shall perform suc 
other duties as the president, with the consent of the tribal 
council, may direct.

19
 
 

ARTICLE XXIII - THE SECRETARY OF THE 
MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1. The Secretary of the Mescalero Apache 
Tribe shall be appointed from within the membership of the 
tribal council.

SECTION 2. The secretary shall call the roll, handle 
all official correspondence of the council, keep the minutes 
of all regular and special meetings of the tribal council, and 
it shall be his duty to submit promptly to the 
Superintendent of the agency copies of minutes of all 
regular and special meetings of the tribal council. 
Following each general election, the secretary shall certify 
to the Superintendent of the reservation the duly elected 
president, vice-president, and councilmen. In the absence of 
the president and vice-president, the secretary shall carry 
on the duties of the president, subject to all restrictions 
thereon embodied in this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XXIV - TREASURER OF THE MESCALERO 
APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1. The treasurer shall be appointed from 

within the membership of the tribal council.

SECTION 2. (a) The treasurer shall accept, receipt 
for, keep and safeguard all funds under the exclusive 
control of the tribe by depositing them in a bank insured 
by an agency of the Federal Government, or in an 
Individual Indian Money Account as directed by the 
Mescalero Apache Tribal Council, and shall keep an 
accurate record of such funds and shall report on all 
receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all 
funds in his custody to the council at regular meetings and 
at such other times as requested by the council. He shall 
not pay or otherwise disburse any funds in custody of the 
council except when properly authorized to do so by the 
council.

(b) The books and records of the treasurer 
shall be audited at least once a year by a 
competent auditor employed by the council, 
and at such other times as the council may 
direct.
(c) The treasurer shall be required to give a 
surety bond satisfactory to the council and 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

20

(d) The treasurer shall be present at all 
meetings of the council unless prevented by 
circumstances beyond his control.
(c) All checks shall be signed and all 
vouchers shall be approved for payment by 
two officers of the tribe as follows: he
president or the vice-president, together with 
the treasurer or, in his absence, the secretary.
(f) In the absence of the president, vice
president, and secretary, the treasurer shall 
carry on the duties of the president.
SECTION 3. The tribal council may require all 
responsible tribal officials and employees to be bonded. 
The premium for the bond shall be paid by the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XXV - PART III - THE JUDICIARY

 
 SECTION 1. The judicial powers of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe shall be vested in the Tribal Courts, including a 
Trial and Appellate Court. The jurisdiction of the Tribal 
Courts shall extend to all matters, criminal and civil, except 
where prohibited by the Constitution, laws or treaties of the 
United States of America, and except as such jurisdiction may 
be otherwise limited from time to time by ordinance of the 
Tribal Council. [As amended March 4, 1977]

SECTION 2. The criminal offenses over which the 
Courts of the Mescalero Apache Tribe have jurisdiction may 
be embodied in a Code of Laws, adopted by ordinance of 
the tribal council, and subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior.

SECTION 3. The duties and procedures of the court 

shall be determined by ordinance of the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE XXVI - COMPOSITION OF THE TRIBAL 
COURTS

 
 SECTION 1.  The trial court shall consist of a chief 
judge and two associate judges, appointed by the President 
of the Mescalero Apache Tribe, with the concurrence of not 
less than a three-fourths majority vote of the whole 
membership of the tribal council.

SECTION 2.  The tribal council shall sit as a court 
of appeals whenever necessary and may hear appeals at any 
regular or special meeting.

SECTION 3.  The tenure and salary of tribal judges 

shall be established by ordinance of the tribal council.

21

SECTION 4.  No person shall be appointed to the 
office of the Tribal Judge unless he is an Indian as defined 
herein, not less than thirty-five years nor more than seventy 
years of age; nor shall any person be appointed as a Tribal 
Judge who has ever been convicted of a felony, or, within one 
year, last past, of a misdemeanor.

For purposes of this Section only, an "Indian" is 
defined as follows: An individual who possesses at least one- 
quarter Indian blood, and is a member of any federally- 
recognized Tribe, nation, or band of Indians, or is an Eskimo, 
Aleut, or other Alaskan native. [As amended February 3, 
1981]
 
 

ARTICLE XXVII - INHERENT POWERS OF THE 
MESCALERO APACHE TRIBE

 
 SECTION 1. No provision of this constitution shall 
be construed as a limitation on the inherent residual 
sovereign powers of the Mescalero Apache Tribe. Any such 
powers, not delegated to the representative tribal 
government by this constitution, are retained for direct 
exercise by the people through referendum, as provided for 
herein, or for exercise by the tribal government following 
amendment of the constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XXVIII - SAVING CLAUSE AND REPEAL 
OF PREVIOUS CONSTITUTION

 
 SECTION 1. The Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation, approved on 
March 25, 1936, under the provisions of Section 16 of the 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act 
of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378), is hereby repealed and 
superseded by this constitution.

SECTION 2. All ordinances and resolutions 
heretofore enacted by the Mescalero Tribal Business 
Committee shall remain in full force and effect to the 
extent that they are not inconsistent with this constitution.

SECTION 3. The incumbent tribal business 
committee and incumbent tribal officers shall remain in 
office and shall be entitled to exercise all powers granted 
by this constitution to the tribal council and tribal officers 
until such time as the first election of the tribal council 
and tribal officers is held under this constitution.

22
 
 

ARTICLE XXIX - OATH OF OFFICE

 
 SECTION 1. No elective official of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe shall be officially installed in the office to 
which such official is elected unless and until the following 
oath has been duly administered by a Judge of the 
Mescalero Apache Tribal Court:

, do solemnly swear
"I, 
that / will support and defend the Constitution 
of the United States against all enemies; that I 
will faithfully and impartially carry out the 
duties of my office, uphold the Constitution of 
the Mescalero Apache Tribe, and represent the 
interests of the Mescalero Apache people. These 
things I will do to the best of my ability, so help 
me God."
 
 

ARTICLE XXX - RATIFICATION OF REVISED 
CONSTITUTION

 
 SECTION 1. This constitution, when adopted by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Mescalero 
Apache Tribe, voting at an election called for that purpose 
by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall cast their 
ballots, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior 
for his approval, and shall be effective from the date of 
approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Secretary 
of the Interior on December 11, 1964, the attached Revised 
Constitution of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero 
Reservation was submitted to the qualified voters of the 
tribe and was on December 18, 1964, duly adopted by a vote 
of 190 for and 103 against, in an election in which at least 
30 percent of the 635 members entitled to vote cast their 
ballot in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as 
amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

KENNETH L. PAYTON 
Chairman, Election Board

23
 
  
  
  
  
 

CHRISTIE LA PAZ
 
 Election Board Member 
 

ALTON PESO 
 
 Election Board Member 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, John A. Carver, Jr., Under Secretary of the 
Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the 
authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 
984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Revised 
Constitution of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero 
Reservation.

Approval recommended:

JAMES E. OFFICER
Associate Commissioner
Bureau of Indian Affairs

JOHN A. CARVER, JR.
Under Secretary of the Interior

[Seal]

WASHINGTON, D.C., January 12, 1965

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 1985/579-399/25244

24

