Bay Mills Indian Community

Bay Mills Indian Community

Home About us Executive Council 

Tribal -Constitution 

Tribal Laws and Court 

Employment Tribal Departments Gaming Commission Forms

Phone Directory Photo Gallery Tribal Member Login

Constitution and Bylaws of the Bay Mills Indian Community

We, the members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan, in order to 

establish a tribal organization, to conserve our common property, to develop our common resources, promote the welfare of ourselves 

and our descendants, do ordain and establish this constitution and by-laws for our Community.
 
  
 

PREAMBLE

 
 This organization shall be known as the Bay Mills Indian Community. 
 

ARTICLE I 

- NAME


Section 1. The jurisdiction of the Bay Mills Indian Community shall extend to all territory within the original confines of the Bay Mills 

Reservation purchased under the Act of June 19, 1860 (12 Stat. 58), and to such other land within or without said boundary lines as 

may be added thereto under any law of the United States, except as otherwise provided by law.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - TERRITORY

 
 AMENDMENT II - DATE : August 7, 1959

Article III of the Constitution shall be amended in its entirety as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE III 

- MEMBERSHIP

 
 Original Members. The membership of the Bay Mills Indian Community shall consist of:

(a)  Each living person of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians of Michigan whose name appears on the Durant 

Roll of 1910 as a member of the Indian group residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, provided such person is not enrolled as 

a member of any other tribe or group of Indians.

(b)  Each living descendant of a person whose name appears on the roll referred to in Section 1 (a) who was residing on the 

Bay Mills Reservation, or on any land added thereto, on October 8, 1936, the date of the adoption of the Constitution of the 

Bay Mills Indian Community.

(c)  Each living person who prior to the approval of this amendment by the Secretary of the Interior has been adopted as a 

http://www.baymills.org/tribal-constitution.php[3/12/2015 10:09:04 AM]

Bay Mills Indian Community

member of the Bay Mills Indian Community by a majority vote of the General Tribal Council, provided such action of the 

Council has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(d)  Each living person born between October 8, 1936, and the date of approval of this amendment by the Secretary of the 

Interior, one of whose parents was a member of the Community and residing on the Bay Mills Reservation at the time of 

the person's birth, and each living person born during that period both of whose parents were members of the Community 

without regard to residence.

Section 2. Future members. Each child of at least 1/4 Indian blood of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians born after the 

date of approval by the Secretary of the Interior of this amendment to any member of the Bay Mills Indian Community or descendant 

of a member shall be entitled to membership in the community, provided that the parent, next of kin, recognized guardian, or person 

responsible for the child's care shall within one year after the birth of the child submit a written application to the President of the 

Executive Council to have the child enrolled. The application shall be accompanied by the child's birth certificate, together with any 

other evidence as to the eligibility of the child for enrollment as the Executive Council may require. If the certificate, other evidence, 

and application are not filed within the designated time, the child shall not be enrolled.

Section 3. Adoption. Any descendant of a person whose name appears on the Durant Roll of 1910 as a member of the Sault Ste. 

Marie Band of Chippewa Indians of Michigan who is not enrolled as a member of any other tribe or group of Indians may be admitted 

to membership in the Bay Mills Indian Community by the General Council with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Section 4. Current Membership Roll. The membership of the Bay Mills Indian Community shall be kept current by striking therefrom 

the names of persons who have relinquished in writing their membership in the Community and deceased persons upon receipt of a 

death certificate or other evidence of death acceptable to the Executive Council, and by adding thereto the names of persons who 

meet the membership requirements,. In the event of the distribution of Community assets, the membership roll shall be submitted to 

the Secretary of the Interior for approval.

Section 5. Appeals. Any person who has been rejected for enrollment as a member of the Community shall have the right to appeal 

within 60 days from the date of written notice or rejection to the Secretary of the Interior from the decision of the Executive Council, 

and the decision of the Secretary of the Interior shall be final.

Section 6 Authority of Council. The General Tribal Council shall have authority to enact ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary 

of the Interior, covering loss of membership and adoption of members into the Community.

Section 1. The governing body of the Community shall be the General Tribal Council which shall be composed of all qualified voters of 
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 the Community.

AMENDMENT IV DATE: July 9, 1974

Section 2. The General Tribal Council shall elect from its own members who are twenty-one (21) years of age or over, by secret ballot, 

a President, a Vice-President, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and one Councilman. The five so elected shall constitute the Executive Council, 

which shall exercise the powers and duties delegated to it by the General Tribal Council which reserves the right of review over actions 

of the Executive Council. Members of the Executive Council shall hold office for a term of two (2) years.

Section 3. Within thirty (30) days after the ratification and approval of this Constitution and By-laws, a General Tribal Council, shall be 

called by the present Business Committee for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and to transact such other business 

as may be necessary.

Section 4. The present Business Committee shall provide the regulations for nominations and the conduct of the first election, and 

thereafter the Executive Council shall make such provisions for all elections.

Section 5. The General Tribal Council shall provide by resolution the date and manner of holding regular meetings.

http://vvvvvv.baymills.org/tribal-constitution.php[3/12/2015 10:09:04 AM]

Bay Mills Indian Community

Section 6. The President of the Executive Council may, or upon petition of ten (10) qualified voters shall, by written notice posted at 

least ten days in advance, call a special meeting of the General Tribal Council.

AMENDMENT  V - DATE: July 9, 1974

Section 7. Any member of the Bay Mills Indian Community who is eighteen (18) years of age or over shall be entitled to vote at any 

election of General Tribal Council meetings at which he presents himself during the official voting.

AMENDMENT VI - DATE: March 12, 1975

Section 8. A number equal to one-fourth of the resident qualified voters of the Bay Mills Indian Community shall constitute a quorum 

at any regular or special meeting of the General Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 1. If a member of the Executive Council or official shall die, resign, permanently leave the reservation or shall be found guilty 

of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or of a felony in any Indian, State or Federal Court, the Executive Council shall declare the 

position vacant and call a General Tribal Council meeting to fill such a vacancy for the unexpired term.

Section 2. The General Tribal Council may by a two-thirds affirmative vote expel any member of the Executive Council for neglect of 

duty or gross misconduct. Before any vote on expulsion is taken, such member shall be given the opportunity to answer any and all 

charges at a designated General Tribal Council meeting; the decision of the General Tribal Council shall be final.

AMENDMENT I - DATE: December 28, 1937
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE GENERAL TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. That the title of Article VI of the Constitution be changed to read, Powers of the General Tribal Council.

Section 1. The General Tribal Council of the Bay Mills Indian Community shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations 

imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local government;

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 

Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets;

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit 

of the Bay Mills Indian Community prior to submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Bay Mills Indian Community in accordance with the terms of a 

charter that may be issued to the Community by the Secretary of the Interior;

(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the 

conduct of members of the Bay Mills Indian Community, providing for the manner of making, holding, and revoking 

assignments of tribal land or interests therein, providing for the levying of assessments for the use of community property 

or facilities, and the appropriation of available tribal funds for public purposes, providing for the licensing of nonmembers 

coming upon the reservation for purposes of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business and for the exclusion from the 

territory of the tribe of persons not so licensed and establishing proper agencies for law enforcement upon the territory 

embraced in the jurisdiction of this constitution;

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, and to delegate to such organizations, or to any 

subordinate boards of officials of the Community, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review any action 

taken by virtue of such delegated power;

http://vvvvvv.baymills.org/tribal-constitution.php[3/12/2015 10:09:04 AM]

Bay Mills Indian Community

(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution and by-laws, regulating the procedure of the General Tribal 

Council or Executive Council and of other community agencies, community officials or community organizations of the Bay 

Mills Indian Community.

Section 2. Future Powers. The General Tribal Council may exercise such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the 

Council by any member of the Community or by the Secretary of the Interior or any other duly authorized official or agency of the 

State or Federal Government.

Section 3. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa 

Indians residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this 

Article, but may be exercised by the people of the Bay Mills Indian Community, through the adoption of appropriate by-laws and 

constitutional amendments.

Section 4. Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 

shall be presented to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or disapprove the 

same. If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall there upon become effective, but the Superintendent 

shall transmit a copy of the same bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from 

the date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying the General Tribal Council of such 

rescission. If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or resolution submitted to him, within ten (10) days after its 

enactment, he shall advise the General Tribal Council of his reasons therefore. If these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it 

may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the 

date of its enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

AMENDMENT I -December 28, 1937

That an Article be added to the Constitution as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE VII - REFERENDUM

 
 Upon a petition of least thirty per centum of the resident eligible voters of the Bay Mills Indian Community, any enacted or proposed 

ordinance, resolution or other regulative act of the Executive Council shall be submitted to a referendum of the resident qualified 

voters.
 
 

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

BYLAWS

 
 Section 1. The President of the Executive Council shall preside over all meetings of the General Tribal Council and Executive Council, 

shall perform the usual duties of a chairman, and exercise any authority delegated to him by the General Tribal Council. He shall vote 

only in the case of a tie.

Section 2. The Vice-President shall assist the President when called upon to do so and in the absence of the President he shall preside. 

When so presiding, he shall have all the rights, privileges and duties as well as the responsibilities of the President.

Section 3. The Secretary of the Council shall conduct all Community correspondence and shall keep an accurate record of all matters 

transacted at General Tribal and Executive Council meetings. It shall be his duty to submit promptly to the Superintendent of the 

jurisdiction and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, copies of all minutes of regular and special meetings of the General Tribal Council.

Section 4. The Treasurer of the Council shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all funds or special funds within the 

control of the community. He shall deposit all funds in such depository as the General Tribal Council shall direct and shall make and 

preserve a faithful record of such funds and shall report on all receipts and expenditure and the amount and nature of all funds in his 

possession and custody, at each regular meeting of the General Tribal Council or the Executive Council, and at such other times as 

requested by the General Tribal Council or the Executive Council. He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his 

possession or custody, except in accordance with a resolution duly passed by the General Tribal Council. The Treasurer shall be 

http://vvvvvv.baymills.org/tribal-constitution.php[3/12/201 5 10:09:04 AM]

Bay Mills Indian Community

required to give a bond satisfactory to the Executive Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, as soon as there are sufficient 

funds in the Treasury to warrant such bond as determined by the General Tribal Council or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Section 5. The duties of all appointive boards or officers of the Community shall be clearly defined by resolutions of the General Tribal 

Council at the time of their creation or appointment. Such boards and officers shall report to the Council from time to time as required, 

and their activities and decisions shall be subject to review by the General Tribal Council upon the petition of any person aggrieved.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - EXECUTIVE COUNCIL MEETINGS

 
 The Executive Council shall meet regularly on the first Monday of January, April, July and November, and at such other times as the 

Executive Council may decide, and on the call of the President or any three members of the Executive Council. Three members of the 

Executive Council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

 
 This Constitution and By-Laws, when adopted by a majority vote of the members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians 

residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan, voting at a special election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 

thirty (30%) percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall 

be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved September 15, 1936, by the Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-Laws was 

submitted for ratification to the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan, and was on 

October 8, 1936, duly adopted by a vote or 70 for, and 4 against, in an election in which over 30 percent (30%) of those entitled to 

vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Arthur W. LeBlanc 

Chairman of Election Board 

John H. Cameron 

Secretary of Election Board 

J.C. Cavill

Superintendent

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Constitution or By-Laws of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of 

Chippewa Indians residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 

incompatible with any provisions of the said Constitution or By-Laws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-Laws.

Approval recommended October 28, 1936.

John Collier 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Harold L. Ickes, 

Secretary of the Interior, 
 
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D.C., November 4, 1936.

Whereas, Section 2 of Article IV and Subsection I(g) of Article VI, of the Bay Mills Constitution empowers the General Tribal Council to 
 
 

RESOLUTION

 
 http://vvvvvv.baymills.org/tribal-constitution.php[3/12/2015 10:09:04 AM]

Bay Mills Indian Community

delegate certain powers to the Executive Council and subordinate organizations, and

Whereas, occasions arise which call for prompt action on the part of the General Tribal Council in order that important business may be 

transacted for the benefit and welfare of the Community, and

Whereas, it is difficult to assemble sufficient tribal members, Constituting a quorum, at any one meeting for the purpose of transacting 

such tribal business,

NOW BE IT RESOLVED that such powers as are enumerated in the Bay Mills constitution and bylaws are delegated to the Executive 

Council, and members present at any official or special meeting held by the Bay Mills Indian Community.

I, the undersigned, as Secretary of the Bay Mills Indian Community hereby certify that in a general Council assemblage xxxxx of whom 

21 constitute a quorum, and held on this 13. day of April 1970, the foregoing resolution was duly adopted at said meeting by an 

affirmative vote of 22 for and an opposing vote of 0, 0 abstaining, and that said resolution has not been rescinded or amended in any 

Certification

way.

[Signatures]

Mrs. Albert Leblanc (act Sec.)

Albert B. Leblanc President

Clayton J Parish Councilman

http://vvvvvv.baymills.org/tribal-constitution.php[3/12/2015 10:09:04 AM]

