 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 

THE BAY MILLS INDIAN 

COMMUNITY 

MICHIGAN


 
  
 APPROVED NOVEMBER 4, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1936

library of congress
MAY 17 1939
 
 

DIVISION OF DOCUMENTS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE BAY MILLS 
INDIAN COMMUNITY

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa 
Indians residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan, in order 
to establish a tribal organization, to conserve our common property, 
to develop our common resources, promote the welfare of ourselves 
and our descendants, do ordain and establish this constitution and 
by-laws for our Community.

Article I—Name

This organization shall be known as the Bay Mills Indian Com

munity.

Article II—Territory

Section 1. The jurisdiction of the Bay Mills Indian Community 
shall extend to all territory within the original confines of the Bay 
Mills Reservation purchased under the Act of June 19,1860 (12 Stat. 
58), and to such other land within or without said boundary lines 
as may be added thereto under any law of the United States, except 
as otherwise provided by law.

Article III—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Bay Mills Indian Community 

shall consist of:

(a)  All members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa In
dians of Michigan, whose names appear on Durant Roll of 1910 
and who are residing on the Bay Mills Reservation at the time of 
the adoption of this Constitution and By-laws shall be members of 
the Community.

(b)  Such descendants of any such member as are residing on the 
Bay Mills Reservation at the time of the adoption of this Constitu
tion and By-laws shall be members of the Community.

(c)  Members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians 
of Michigan whose names appear on the Durant Roll of 1910, and who 
are residing on Sugar Island or Drummond Island at the time this 
Constitution and By-laws are adopted, may be adopted as members of 
the Community by a majority vote of the General Tribal Council with 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(d)  Descendants of members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chip
pewa Indians who are residing on Sugar Island or Drummond Island 
at the time of adoption of this Constitution and By-laws may be 
(1)

2

adopted as members of the Community by a majority vote of the Gen
eral Tribal Council with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(e)  Children born to any member after the adoption of this Consti
tution, provided such member is a resident of the reservation at the 
time of birth of said children, and all children both of whose parents 
are members of the Community, shall be members of the Community.
(f) Within one year after the adoption of this Constitution and 
By-laws, the Executive Council shall prepare a roll of the members of 
the Bay Mills Indian Community which shall be official when ap
proved by the General Tribal Council, and by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

Sec. 2. The General Tribal Council shall have authority to promul
gate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering future membership and the adoption of new members; also 
covering the loss of membership by reason of continued absence from 
the reservation or from Sugar Island or Drummond Island.

Article IV—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Community shall be the Gen
eral Tribal Council which shall be composed of all qualified voters of 
the Community.

Sec. 2. The General Tribal Council shall elect from its own mem
bers who are thirty years of age or over, by secret ballot, a President, 
a Vice-President, a Secretary, a Treasurer and one Councilman, the 
five so elected to constitute the Executive Council, which shall exer
cise the powers and duties delegated to it by the General Tribal 
Council which reserves the right of review over the actions of the 
Executive Council. Members of the Executive Council shall hold 
office for a term of two (2) years.

Sec. 3. Within thirty (30) days after the ratification and approval 
of this Constitution and By-laws, a General Tribal Council shall be 
called by the present Business Committee for the purpose of electing 
the officers named herein, and to transact such other business as may 
be necessary.

Sec. 4. The present Business Committee shall provide the regula
tions for nominations and the conduct of the first election, and there
after the Executive Council shall make such provisions for all 
elections.

Sec. 5. The General Tribal Council shall provide by resolution the 

date and manner of holding regular meetings.

Sec. 6. The President of the Executive Council may, or upon peti
tion of ten (10) qualified voters shall, by written notice posted at 
least ten days in advance, call a special meeting of the General Tribal 
Council.

Sec. 7. Any member of the Bay Mills Indian Community who is 
twenty-one years of age or over shall be entitled to vote at any elec
tion or General Tribal Council meeting at which he presents himself 
during the official voting.

Sec. 8. One third of the qualified voters of the Community shall 
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the General 
Tribal Council.

3

Article V—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a member of the Executive Council or official shall 
die, resign, permanently leave the reservation or shall be found guilty 
of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or of a felony in any Indian, 
State, or Federal Court, the Executive Council shall declare the posi
tion vacant and call a General Tribal Council meeting to fill such 
vacancy for the unexpired term.

Sec. 2. The General Tribal Council may by a two-thirds affirma
tive vote expel any member of the Executive Council for neglect of 
duty or gross misconduct. Before any vote on expulsion is taken, 
such member shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all 
charges at a designated General Tribal Council meeting; the deci
sion of the General Tribal Council shall be final.

Article VI—Referendum

Section 1. The General Tribal Council of the Bay Mills Indian 
Community shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limi
tations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local government;
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets;

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior with regard to 
all appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Bay Mills Indian Community prior to the submission of such esti
mates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Bay 
Mills Indian Community in accordance with the terms of a charter 
that may be issued to the Community by the Secretary of the 
Interior;

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct 
of members of the Bay Mills Indian Community, providing for the 
manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of tribal land 
or interests therein, providing for the levying of assessments for the 
use of community property or facilities, and the appropriation of 
available tribal funds for public purposes, providing for the licens
ing of nonmembers coming upon the reservation for purposes of 
hunting, fishing, trading or other business and for the exclusion 
from the territory of the tribe of persons not so licensed and estab
lishing proper agencies for law enforcement upon the territory em
braced in the jurisdiction of this constitution; 

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the Community, any of the foregoing powers, reserv
ing the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated 
power;

(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and By-laws, regulating the procedure of the General Tribal Coun

4

cil or Executive Council and of other community agencies, commun
ity officials or community organizations of the Bay Mills Indian 
Community. 

Sec. 2. Future Powers.—The General Tribal Council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Coun
cil by any member of the Community or by the Secretary of the In
terior or any other duly authorized official or agency of the State or 
Federal Government.

Sec. 3. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the members of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians 
residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan, but not expressly 
referred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this Article, 
but may be exercised by the people of the Bay Mills Indian Com
munity, through the adoption of appropriate by-laws and consti
tutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this Con
stitution is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be 
presented to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction who shall, within 
ten days thereafter, approve or disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it 
shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall trans
mit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of 
the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of 
enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by 
notifying the General Tribal Council of such rescission.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him, within ten days after its enactment, he 
shall advise the General Tribal Council of his reasons therefor. If 
these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by a majority 
vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of its enactment, 
approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolu
tion shall become effective.

Artice VIII—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Community voting at an election called 
for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at 
least thirty percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; 
but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall lie the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an elec
tion on any proposed amendment upon receipt of a petition signed by 
one-third of the qualified voters, members of the Community.
 
 

BY-LAWS

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers 

Section 1. The President of the Executive Council shall preside 
over all meetings of the General Tribal Council and Executive 
Council, shall perform the usual duties of a chairman, and exercise 
any authority delegated to him by the General Tribal Council. He 
shall vote only in the case of a tie.

5

Sec. 2. The Vice-President shall assist the President when called 
upon to do so and in the absence of the President he shall preside. 
When so presiding, he shall have all the rights, privileges and 
duties as well as the responsibilities of the President.

Sec. 3. The Secretary of the Council shall conduct all Community 
correspondence and shall keep an accurate record of all matters trans
acted at General Tribal and Executive Council meetings. It shall 
be his duty to submit promptly to the Superintendent of the juris
diction and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, copies of all minutes 
of regular and special meetings of the General Tribal Council.

Sec. 4. The Treasurer of the Council shall accept, receive, receipt 
for, preserve and safeguard all funds or special funds within the 
control of the Community. He shall deposit all funds in such de
pository as the General Tribal Council shall direct and shall make 
and preserve a faithful record of such funds and shall report on all 
receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds in 
his possession and custody, at each regular meeting of the General 
Tribal Council, and at such other times as requested by the General 
Tribal Council or the Executive Council.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his posses
sion or custody, except in accordance with a resolution duly passed 
by the General Tribal Council.

The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the 
Executive Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, as 
soon as there are sufficient funds in the Treasury to warrant 
such bond as determined by the General Tribal Council or the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 5. The duties of all appointive boards or officers of the Com
munity shall be clearly defined by resolutions of the General Tribal 
Council at the time of their creation or appointment. Such boards 
and officers shall report to the Council from time to time as required, 
and their activities and decisions shall be subject to review by the 
General Tribal Council upon the petition of any person aggrieved.

Article II—Executive Council Meetings

The Executive Council shall meet regularly on the first Monday of 
January, April, July and November, and at such other times as the 
Executive Council may decide, and on the call of the President or 
any three members of the Executive Council. Three members of 
the Executive Council shall constitute a quorum at any regular or 
special meeting.

Article III—Ratification of Constitution and By-Laws

This Constitution and By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote of 
the members of the Saulte Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa Indians 
residing on the Bay Mills Reservation Michigan, voting at a special 
election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 
thirty per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be sub
mitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be 
effective from the date of such approval.

6
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved September 15, 1936, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was sub
mitted for ratification to the Sault Ste. Marie Band of Chippewa 
Indians residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan, and was 
on October 8, 1936, duly adopted by a vote of 70 for, and 4 against, in 
an election in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast 
their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganiza
tion Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 
June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Arthur W. LeBlanc, 
Chairman of Election Board.

John H. Cameron, 

Secretary of Election Board.

J. C. Cavill,

Superintendent nt.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Sault Ste. Marie Band of 
Chippewa Indians residing on the Bay Mills Reservation, Michigan.
All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution or 
By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended October 28, 1936.

John Collier, 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., November 4, 1936.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]
 
 

AMENDMENT I

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE BAY MILLS INDIAN 
COMMUNITY, MICHIGAN

 
 Section 1. That the title of Article VI of the Constitution be changed to read, 

“Powers of the General Tribal Council.”

Section 2. That an Article be added to the Constitution, as follows:

Article VII—Referendum

“Upon a petition of at least thirty per centum of the resident eligible voters 
of the Bay Mills Indian Community, any enacted or proposed ordinance, reso
lution or other regulative act of the Executive Council shall be submitted to 
a referendum of the resident qualified voters.”
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 30, 1937 by the Assistant Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached amendments to the Constitution and By-laws of 
the Bay Mills Indian Community were submitted for ratification to the quali
fied voters of the Community, and were on November 27, 1937, duly adopted 
by a vote of 50 for and 2 against for Article VI of the Constitution, and 41 
for and 2 against for Article VII of the Constitution, in an election in which 
over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with 
section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), 
as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Herman E. Cameron, 
Chairman of Election Board.

John H. Cameron, 

Secretary of Election Board.

J. C. Cavill,

Superintendent of the Great Lakes Agency.

I,  Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 
1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Amendments 
to the Constitution and By-laws of the Bay Mills Indian Community.

Approval recommended December 16, 1937.

William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., December 28, 1937.

52218—38

U. S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 
 
 

 
 
 