 
 BIG PINE PAIUTE TRIBE OF THE OWENS VALLEY 
Big Pine Indian Reservation 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE BIG PINE PAIUTE TRIBE OF THE OWENS VALLEY 
INYO COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

 
  
 NOVEMBER 13, 1998 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We the members of the Big Pine Paiute Tribe of the Owens 

Valley Indians of California, hereinafter referred to as the Tribe, in 

order to establish a formal Tribal organization and to promote the 

welfare of ourselves and our descendants, do hereby ordain and 

establish this Constitution and Bylaws.

The Tribal Land Assignment Ordinance No. 08, adopted 

October 06, 1998 shall be implemented on November 13, 1998 and 

shall supercede the April 5, 1962 Land Assignment Ordinance. All 

prior assignments granted under the 1962 Land Ordinance shall 

remain in effect.

--------This Constitution and Bylaws shall in no way affect or 

disturb, and in fact shall be independent and, in event of any 

conflict, shall be subordinate to the Land Exchange Agreement of 

May 18, 1938, between the Department of Water and Power, City 

of Los Angeles, California, and the City of Los Angeles, 

California, and the U.S. of America, providing for exchange of 

land and transfer of places of use of Indian water rights.
 
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 ■ OF THE 
 

BIG PINE BAND OF THE
 
 OWENS VALLEY PAIUTE/SHOSHONE INDIANS
 
 
INYO COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE

 
 We the members of the Big Pine Band of Owens Valley Paiute/ 

Shoshone Indians of California, hereinafter referred to as the 

Band, in order to establish a formal Tribal organization and to 

promote the welfare of ourselves and our descendants, do hereby 

ordain and establish this Constitution and Bylaws.

The present land assignment ordinance, adopted April 5, 1962, 

shall remain in effect with this exception: The Big Pine General 

Council shall be substituted for the Owens Valley Board of Trustees 

as the governing body over the assignment ordinance. The use of 

the existing assignment ordinance is to be for an interim period 

until the General Council adopts a new land assignment and land 

use ordinance as provided herein.

This Constitution and Bylaws shall in no way affect or dis

turb, and in fact shall be independent and, in event of any con

flict, shall be subordinate to the Land Exchange Agreement of 

May 18, 1938, between the Department of Water and Power, City of 

Los Angeles, California, and the City of Los Angeles, California, 

end the U.S. of America, providing for exchange of land and trans

fer of places of use of Indian water rights.

>" vr
 
 

LAND DESCRIPTION

 
 The east half (El/2) of the southwest quarter (SWl/4) and 

east half (El/2) of the west half (Wl/2) of the southwest quarter 

(SW1/4) of section seventeen (17) Township nine (9) south, Range 

34 east, M.D.B. & M. Accepting therefrom the following parcel 

of land, the same being a portion of the east side of that parcel 

commonly known as the Big Pine Union High School lot, said portion 

being bounded and described as follows, to wit:

Commencing at a point 777 feet north and 740 feet east of 

the southwest corner of said Section 17; thence north 500 feet 

along the western boundary of a sixty foot street; thence west 

80 feet, more or less, along the southern boundary of a sixty foot 

street to the west line of the east half (El/2) of the west half 

(Wl/2) of the southwest quarter (SWl/4) of said Section 17; thence 

east 80 feet, more or less, along the northern boundary of a sixty

foot street to the place of beginning, containing 0.92 acres, more 

or less.

The northeast quarter (NEl/4) of the northeast quarter 

(NEl/4) of Section 19, Township Nine (9) south, Range thirty-four 

(34) east, M.D.B. & M.

The east half (El/2) of the northwest quarter (NW1/4), and 

the northwest quarter (NW1/4) of the Northwest quarter (NW1/4) of 

section 20, Township Nine (9) south, Range thirty-four (34) east, 

M.D.B. & M., containing 279.08 acres.

The name of this organisation is the Big Pine Band of the 

Owens Valley Paiute-Shoshone Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE II - AREA

 
 The jurisdiction of the Big Pine Band shall be as follows:

All lands now within the Big Pine Reservation, Inyo County, 

California, as described by the deed dated June 26, 1939, made 

pursuant to the Act of April 20, 1937 (50 Stat. 70), a proportionate

share of the water rights appurtenant to the lands patented to the 

City of Los Angeles, July 9, 1941, which patent excepted and 

reserved to the United States any and all water rights, which shall 

be transferred along with a porportionate share of the water salvaged 

and conserved when said water rights was transferred and became 

appurtenant to the lands hereafter described in accordance with 

the Land Exchange Agreement of May 18, 1938, and to such other 

lands and properties as may hereafter be qcquired or added 

thereto. The Act of April 20, 1937 (50 Stat. 70), provides

that the Secretary of the Interior shall hold the lands acquired

pursuant to this Act, in trust, for the Indian Band concerned.

The Lands described below and water rights which were transferred

to and became appurtenant to these lands in accordance with the

Land Exchange Agreement of May 18, 1938, but accepting therefrom

any and all water rights in any way pertaining thereto which were

reserved by the City of Los Angeles in the Land Exchange Agreement

of May 18, 1938, are held in trust for the Big Pine Band of Owens

Valley Paiute-Shoshone Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1 - The membership of the band shall consist of those 

living person; in the following categories:

(a)  Perrons who hold standard assignments on the Big Pine

Reservation as of the effective date of this Constitution 

and Bylaws (hereafter assignees).

(b)  Persons who are one-fourth (l/4) degree Big Pine 

Paiute/Shoshone Indian.

Section 2 - Persons who meet the requirements of Section 1 (a) 

or 1 (b) of this article, but have received a Public Domain 

Allotment or an allotment on another reservation, or are officially 

enrolled with or are recognized members of some other tribe or 

band shall not be eligible for membership with the Big Pine Band.

A "recognized member of another tribe or band” is a person who 

has received a land-use assignment or has otherwise received 

benefits on another reservation or rancheria, except through in

heritance.

Section 3 - Admission to membership through adoption shall be 

governed in accordance with an ordinance enacted by the General 

Council, such ordinance to become effective upon approval by the 

General Council.

Section 4 - The official membership roll shall be prepared in 

accordance with an ordinance adopted by the General Council.

Such ordinance shall contain provisions for enrollment procedures, 

enrollment committees, application forms, approval or disapproval 

of applications, rejection notices, appeals, corrections, and pro

visions for keeping the roll on a current basis.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1 - The governing body of the Band shall be the Tribal 

Council which shall be composed of five (5) qualified voters duly 

elected by the General Council which is composed of all the quali

fied voters of the Band.

Section 2 - All enrolled members of the Big Pine Band who are 

eighteen (18) years of age or older and who have maintained 

thirty (30) days residence on the Big Pine Reservation prior to 

an election are qualified voters.

Section 3 - The General Council shall, by secret ballot, elect 

a Tribal Council consisting of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, 

a Secretary, Treasurer and one Member-At-Large.

Section 4 - The General Council or the Tribal Council may appoint 

or elect such other committees as are oeemed necessary.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1 - All elections shall be conducted in accordance with 

an election ordinance adopted by the General Council.

Section 2 - Any voter of the General Council, twenty-one (21) 

years of age or older, if duly nominated and elected, has the right 

to hold office. Nominations for the Tribal Council shall be made 

from the floor at a General Council meeting. Any member of the 

Band has the right to declare his/her intent to run for office 

and shall be included on the ballot. 
 
 

 
 
 
 Section 3- The first election of officers shall be held on the 

first (1st) Tuesday in June following approval of this organizational 

document. At this election the Vice-Chairperson and the Secretary 

shall be electee for the period of one (1) year and the other three 

(3) members of the Tribal Council shall be elected for two (2) 

years, or until a successor is elected and installed. Elections 

shall be held each year on the first (1st) Tuesday in June. Follow

ing approval of this organizational document, the individuals now 

holding office shall serve as the Tribal Council under this Consti

tution until the first regular election is held as provided herein.

Section - The candidate receiving the highest number of voted 

for the respective offices shall be declared elected. In case 

an election results in a tie vote, the Chairperson shall order a 

new election for the office or offices in question, which shall 

be held within thirty (30) days. The same candidates shall be 

voted upon in the second election.

Section 5 - All elections of officers shall be conducted by an 

Election Committee, composed of four (4) General Council members, 

appointed by the Tribal Council. Nominee(s) for the Tribal Coun

cil shall not be appointed to the Election Committee. Voting 

will be by secret ballot, with the name of each candidate and 

the office he/she seeks shown thereon. Absentee ballots shall be 

furnished upon request to qualified voters who will be unable to 

attend the regular annual election meeting, or the subsequent 

election meeting following a tie vote cast at the annual election. 

Absentee ballots must be requested 10 days prior to the election 

and must be returned by the day of the election so that they can

be included in the tally of ballots cast at the election meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL

 
 Section 1 - If an officer shall die, resign or be convicted 

of a felony in any County, State or Federal Court, the office shall 

be automatically vacated. Any office which is vacated shall be 

filled withit thirty (30) days of the date it becomes vacant by 

a special election at a General Council meeting called for this 

purpose by the Tribal Council, unless such vacancy occurs within 

sixty (60) days of the regular annual election. The office shall 

then remain vacant until such election.

Section 2 - Not more than ten (10) days after receipt of a peti

tion requesting the removal from office of an elected official, 

which petition shall set forth the specific reasons for which re

moval is sought and shall be signed by not less than fifty-one 

percent (51%) of the voters, the Tribal Council shall call a 

General Council meeting to hear the charges against the official. 

It shall at the same time notify the accused in writing of the

------------ charges against him and of the date, hour and place of the general 

Council meeting, at which time he may appear and answer those 

charges. After the accused has had an opportunity to be heard 

by the General Council, a secret ballot shall be taken on the 

question of removal. The decision of a majority of those present 

and voting shall govern, providing at least fifty-one percent (51%) 

of those eligible to vote shall vote. If the vote is to remove 

the official, his office shall be automatically vacated and the 

General Council shall proceed to nominate candidates and elect 

a replacement official who shall serve the unexpired term of
 
 

 
 
 office. Such General Council meetings shall be held within thirty 

(30) days of the date that a valid petition for removal action 

is filed with the Tribal Council.

Section 3 - No absentee ballots shall be cast in either of the 

elections provided for in this article.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1 - The Tribal Council shall have the power and respon

sibilities hereinafter provided, subject to any limitation imposed 

upon such powers by the statutes or the Constitution of the United 

States.

A. To negotiate with Federal, State and Local govern

ments on any matters pertaining to the welfare of the 

Big Pine Band of Indians.

B. To employ legal counsel of its choice and to fix 

fees for such counsel.

C. To manage, lease or otherwise operate all unassigned 

tribal lands, houses constructed under the Trust Agree

ments, funds accrued from operation and maintenance of 

improvements under the Trust Agreements, community enter

prises, economic affairs of the Big Pine Indians in 

conformity with applicable laws, including but not 

limited to the establishment of housing or rental authori

ties, loan programs, and approval of planning, program

ming and development projects for all tribal lands and 

assets, and submitting applications for Federal and 

State grants and assistance and loans.
 
 

  
 
 D. 

To exercise such functions as may be necessary to 

protect and promote the interest of the Big Pine Indian 

Band, including the establishment of rules of procedure 

for the conduct of its affairs, including but not limited 

to: ordinances and resolutions or enactments concerning land, 

utilities, elections, non-nembers, licencing of businesses taxation 

of the Tribe requiring regulation or legislation.

E. To borrow money from an Indian Credit Fund, or 

from any other Federal or State Agency or other reputable 

lending agency, and to pledge or assign future tribal 

income as security for such loans.

F. To purchase in the Big Pine Paiute/Shoshone Indian 

Band name, land or other property the Tribal Council 

may deem beneficial to the members.

G. To appropriate and use community funds on deposit 

in the local treasury, U.S. Treasury, or other depository 

for the benefit of the community members.

H. To assess fees for payment of expenses or to finance 

any project which is for the benefit of Band members.

I. To lease, rent or dispose of unassigned tribal property.

J. To make assignments of land in accordance with a 

 land assignment and land use ordinance.

K. Authority to create corporation and other subordinate

bodies.

■

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Big Pine Paiute/
 
 

 
 
 
 
 Shoshone Indian Band, but not expressly referred to in this Con

stitution shall not be abridged, but may be exercised by the

members of the General Council through the adoption of appropriate 

laws, constitutional amendments, ordinances, resolutions, or 

her legislative enactments.

The Tribal Council may also exercise such future powers as may

be delegated to it by the Secretary of the Interior or by any 

ether authorized agencies of the Federal, State or Local governments, 

or by the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1 - Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held 

on the first (1st) Wednesday of the month. Special meetings of

 the Tribal Council may be called by the Chairperson and shall be 

called by him upon receipt of a petition signed by at least three

(3) Council members, and when so called, the Tribal Council shall 

give the power to transact business as in regular meetings.

Members will be notified at least three (3) days in advance of

1 special tribal meetings.

Section 2 - A quorum shall consist of any four (4) of the five

(5) Tribal Council members. No business shall be transacted 

unless a quorum is present.

Section 3 - The General Council shall meet quarterly on dates

on call of the Chairperson or by a majority vote of the Tribal Council
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1 - The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of 

the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (92 Stat. 73), against actions of 

a tribe in the exercise of its powers of self-government shall 

apply to the Big Pine Indian reservation, its officers and all 

persons within its jurisdictions.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - AMENDMENT

 
 Section 1 - This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by 

thirty percent (30%) of the General Council at a meeting duly 

called for that purpose, and such amendments shall be effective 

upon approval by the General Council.
 
  
  
 

T

 
 i

ld
h

l

; 
 

ARTICLE XI  - REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1 - Upon presentation to the Big Pine Tribal Council of 

a petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters, 

the Tribal Council shall either: (1) Adopt the provisions of 

the petition by ordinance, resolution, or other appropriate action, 

or (2) Provide that the issue presented by the petition be 

voted on within sixty (60) days, by secret ballot, at a regular

or special election. The Big Pine Tribal Council shall abide 

by the vote of the majority of the voters at any such election, 

provided at least fifty-one percent (51%) of those eligible to 

vote have voted.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE BIG PINE BAND 

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1 - On July 1 of each year, newly elected officers
 
 

 
 
 
 shall assume their respective offices and duties.

Section 2 - The Chairperson of the Tribal Council shall preside 

at all meetings of the General Council and of the Tribal Council 

and shall execute on behalf of the Band all contracts, leases 

or other documents approved by the General Council or the Tribal 

Council. He/she will have general supervision of all other 

officers, employees and committees of the Band and see that their 

duties are properly performed. When neither the General Council 

nor the Tribal Council is in session, he/she shall be the official 

representative of the Band.

Section 3 - The Vice-Chairperson shall assist the Chairperson 

when called upon to do so. In the absence of the Chairperson, 

he/she shall preside and when so presiding shall have the rights, 

privileges, duties and responsibilities of the Chairperson.

Section 4 - The Secretary shall keep the minutes of all meet

ings and shall attest to the enactments of all resolutions and 

ordinances. Copies of all minutes, resolutions and ordinances 

shall be kept in the Tribal Office at all times.

Section 5 - The Treasurer shall carry out the financial directives 

of the General Council, receive all local monies of the Reserva

tion and keep an accurate account of the receipts and disburse

ments. Funds shall be deposited in the Reservation account in

a local bank selected by the Tribal Council where depositors’ 

funds are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation.

 All disbursements shall be made by check in accordance with reso

lutions of the Tribal Council and shall be co-signed by the Chair

person or the Vice-Chairperson in the absence of the Chairperson.

upon request by the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council may 

authorize payment of the annual bond premium from the local

 Reservation funds. The Treasurer shall give written financial 

report to the General Council at each meeting, and all financial 

records shall be available for inspection by any member of the 

Big Pine Band, and such other persons as are authorized by the 

Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE II - ADOPTION 

 
 Section 1 - This Constitution and Bylaws shall be effective 

when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the 

Big Pine Band.

We, the undersigned, duly elected officials of the Big Pine

Tribal Council, do hereby certify that the foregoing Constitution 

and Bylaws were adopted by the voters of the Big Pine Band at a

duly called special election held on May 23, 1980,

by a vote of 34 "for", 18 "against", and 0 

"abstain”.
 
 

 
 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

AMENDMENTS

 
 On the following dates, this Constitution and Bylaws was amended 
and those amendments are incorporated into this document.

Amendment #1: June 4, 1985, Article VIII - MEETINGS Section 2

Tribal Council quorum changed to three (3).
VOTE: 30 FOR, 19 AGAINST AND 0 ABSTAINING.

Amendment #2: July 11, 1989, Article II - MEMBERSHIP Section 1 
addition of one category for Lineal descendants. 
VOTE : 45 FOR, 29 AGAINST AND 0 ABSTAINING.

14

