 
  
  
 United States Department of the Interior 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 Washington, D.C. 20240 
 

IN REPLY REFER TO

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES - TR 

2611 MS/MIB

THROUGH: SACRAMENTO AREA DIRECTOR

SEP 2 2 1994

Mr. Harold Brafford
Superintendent, Central California Agency
Bureau of Indian Affairs
1824 Tribute Road
Sacramento, California 95815

Dear Mr. Brafford:

We have received the results of the election held on August 17, 1994, by the qualified voters 
of the Bridgeport Indian Colony. The election was called in accordance with an order issued 
on May 18, 1994, which permitted the qualified voters of the Colony to vote on the adoption 
or rejection of a proposed Amended Constitution of the Bridgeport Indian Colony of the 
Bridgeport Indian Reservation, Mono County, Bridgeport, California.

As evidenced by the completed Certificate of Results of Election, the proposed Amended 
Constitution of the Bridgeport Indian Colony was duly adopted on August 17, 1994, by a vote 
of 10 for and 2 against in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 21 members 
registered and entitled to vote cast their ballots.

Our letter of May 18, 1994, to the Chairman, Bridgeport Indian Colony, indicated that "we 
continue to find subsections 2.a.6, 2.a. 13, and 2.a. 15 and 2.a. 19 of Article V - Powers may be 
contrary, in whole or in part, to Federal law because they assert powers beyond the scope of an 
adult Indian community " and that the Secretary may disapprove the Constitution if adopted. 
The letter went on to note that the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs had requested that the 
Solicitor reexamine the legal basis for the opinions on which this decision was based to 
determine if the distinction is valid. If the Solicitor concluded that the distinction is not valid 
or is no longer valid because of developments in the law, such a conclusion would resolve our 
concerns that these enumerated powers might be contrary to applicable law. In the interim, 
Congress on May 31, 1994, enacted Public Law 103-263 which amended Section 16 of the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (IRA) (25 U.S.C. 476) by adding subsections (f) and (g) to address the 
development of a distinction within the Department between "created" and "historic" tribes. 
This subsection precludes the Department and any other agency from promulgating regulations 

or any other actions which draw distinctions between federally recognized tribes regarding the 
extent of their inherent sovereign powers. Basically this Act represents an "equal footing" 
doctrine for tribes in that they all have the same sovereignty and political relationship with the 
United States regardless of the means by which they were recognized or the method of their 
governmental organization.

In light of Public Law 103-263, the Amended Constitution of the Bridgeport Indian Colony, as 
adopted on August 17, 1934, is hereby approved pursuant to the authority delegated to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated 
to me by 230 D.M. 2.4. Please deliver the enclosed approved original document to the Colony.

Sincerely,

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Enclosure
 
  
  
 

AMENDED OCNSTIIUTICN

OF THE

 
 br:

?CRT INDIAN COLONY 
 

OF THE

 
 br:lies?ORT INDIAN RESERVATION

MONO COUNTY, BR:ISM™PCRT, CALIFORNIA
 
  
  
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE 

ARTICLE I 

 
 -  Name  
 

ARTICLE II 

 
 -  Territory and  Jurisdiction 
 
 

ARTICLE III 
 
 Section 1. 

-  Membership 

Classes of  Members 
a.  Historical Members 
b.  Lineal Members 
c.  Honorary Members 

Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4. 
Section 5. 
Section 6. 
Section 7. 
Section 8. 
Section 9. 
Section 10. 
 
  
  
 

ARTICLE IV 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2. 
■ Section 3. 
Section 4. 
Section 5.  
 

ARTICLE V 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4. 

Section 5. 

Section 6. 

Section 7. 

Section 8. 
Section 9. 

Membership  Roll and Enrollment Ordinance 
Appeal 
Withdrawal 
Revocation 
Enrollment  Date and Application 
Ineligible  Applicants for Membership 
Forfeiture  of Membership 
Membership  Roll Corrections 
Probationary Period 

- Governing Body 

Division of Power 
Tribal Council 
General Council 
Code of Ethics 
Tribal Judiciary  Powers 

- Powers 

General Council 
Tribal Council 
Reserved Powers of General Council 
Limited Power of  the Tribal Council to
Transfer Colony Land Held In Trust By the
United States of America Out of Colony Ownership 
Limited Power of the Tribal Council to
Encumber Colony Land Held In Trust By The 
United States of America 
Limited Power of the Tribal Council to
Encumber Colony Land Not Held In Trust by 
the United States of America 
Limited Power of the Tribal Council to
Develop Natural Resources 
Principal of Construction 
Tribal Judiciary 

Page

1

1

1.

2
2
2
2
2

3
3
3
3
3
3
4
4
4

4
4
5
5
5
5

6
6
7
9

10

10

10
10
11

9
 
 

 
 
 
ARTICLE VI 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4. 
Section 5. 
Section 6. 

Section 7. 

Section 

8. 
 
  
  
 

ARTICLE VII 
 
 Section 
1. 
2. 
Section 
Section 
3. 
Section 
4.  
 

ARTICLE VIII 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2. 
 
  
  
  
 

ARTICLE IX 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4.  
 

ARTICLE X 
 
 Section 1.  
 

ARTICLE XI 

 
  
  
  
 Section 1. 
Section 2.  
 

ARTICLE XII 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2.  
 

ARTICLE XIII 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4. 
Section 5. 

- Elections 

Election Ordinance 
Election Board 
Tribal Council Balloting 
Eligibility 
Qualification of Candidates 
Term of Office: Present Tribal Council
Members and First Election Procedures 
Candidates, Timing of Elections, and
Election Procedures 
Election of Officers and At-Large Members 

-  Duties of  Officers 

Chairperson 
Vice-Chairperson 
Secretary/Treasurer 
Surety Bonds 

- Meetings 

General Council 
Tribal Council 

-  Enactment  of Laws 

Ordinances 
Resolutions 
Record Keeping 
Limited Approval by the Secretary of the
Interior 

-  Vacancies 

Vacancy Criteria 

-  Removal and Recall 

Removal 
Recall 

- Referendum and Repeal 

Procedure 
Limitation, on Referendum and Repeal 

- Bill of Rights 

Freedoms Guaranteed 
Limitations cn Constitution 
Property Rights 
Access to Colony Records 
Indian Civil Rights Act 
 
  
  
 

ARTICLE XIV 

 
 - Ratification  
 

ARTICLE XV 
 
 Section 1. 
Section 2. 

- Amendments 

Procedure 
Effective Date 

12
12
12
12
12
12

12

13
14

14
14
16
16
17

17
17
17

18
18
18
18

19

19
19

19
19
20

21
21
22

22
22
22
22
22
22

23

23
23
24
 
  
 

ARTICLE XVI 

 
 - Severability 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS' OF ELECTION  
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL 


 
 24

25

26 
 

AMENDED CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 
BRIDGEPORT INDIAN COLONY 
OF THE 
BRIDGEPORT INDIAN RESERVATION 

 
  
 Mono County 
Bridgeport, California 
 

PREAMBLE 

 
 We, the members of the Bridgeport Indian Colony of the Bridgeport Indian 
Reservation, a federally recognized sovereign Indian tribe (25 U.S.C.  476, 
479), do hereby adept this Constitution to govern under our own laws and 
customs for the common good and well-being of the Bridgeport Indian Colony and 
its members, to maintain and foster our tribal culture, language and identity, 
to protect and conserve our land and natural resources, to promote the social, 
economic and general welfare of our people, to insure our political integrity, 
to protect the individual rights of our members, to maintain peace and order 
through the establishment and administration of a justice system, and to 
preserve, secure and exercise all of the rights and powers inherent in our 
sovereign status, guaranteed to us by the laws of the United States, do hereby 
establish and adopt this document in accordance with the Indian Reorganization 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, which from this time forward 
shall govern the Bridgeport Indian Colony.

This Constitution shall supersede the Constitution of the Bridgeport 
Indian Colony of the Bridgeport Indian Reservation, adopted June 16, 1976, 
and approved by the Secretary of the Interior on July 21, 1976, including 
Amendments I and II adopted on January 31, 1979, and approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior on February 7, 1979. This Constitution shall govern the 
Bridgeport Indian Colony from its effective date.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Bridgeport Indian Colony, 
hereinafter referred to as "the Colony". Throughout this Constitution where 
the word "tribal council" is used, it refers to one of the Colony's governing 
bodies. The word "tribe" as used in the Constitution refers to other sovereign 
Indian tribal entities.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Colony shall extend to all lands, water and 
resources within the exterior boundaries of the Bridgeport Indian Reservation 
as established by Public Law 93-451 (October 18, 1974), and to any and all 
lands held by the Colony, and to such other additional lands, water and 
resources acquired by the colony or by the united states for the benefit of 
the Colony.

Except as expressly prohibited by Federal law, the Colony shall have 
jurisdiction over all persons, property, lands, water, air space, resources 
and all activities occurring within the boundaries of the reservation or on 
other lands within the jurisdiction of the Colony, notwithstanding the issuance 
of any right-of-way. Nothing in this article shall be construed to limit the 
ability of the Colony to exercise its jurisdiction based upon its inherent 
sovereignty.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Membership in the Bridgeport Indian Colony shall consist of the following 

classes of members:

Section 1.  Classes of Members.

The Colony consists of descendants of the Miwok, Mono, Paiute, Shoshone 
and Washoe peoples, organized as a sovereign nation. Because of the Colony's 
unique historical status, it recognizes as members, descendants of the Miwok, 
Mono, Paiute, Shoshone and Washoe peoples, consistent with the following 
membership criteria:

a.  Historical Members. 

Historical members consist of all persons whose names appear on the 
Official Membership Roll dated July 27, 1993, and their children, regardless of 
date of birth, on the effective date of this Constitution. Historical members 
of the Colony may be members of another Indian tribe, but may not hold an 
interest in an assignment, Federal allotment (unless the allotment interest is 
 obtained through an inheritance), or in any other land, if the land interest is 
located within the boundaries of another tribes's reservation, or within a 
dependent Indian community.

b.  Lineal Members.

Lineal members consist of all persons who are lineal descendants of any 
person designated in subsection (a) above, who possess at least one-fourth 
(1/4) degree Indian blood, and who make an application and are approved for 
membership in accordance with the enrollment ordinance adopted by majority vote 
of the General Council. Lineal members may not be a member of another Indian 
tribe, and are subject to the provisions of this Article III, Section 7.

c.  Honorary Members.

All persons of Indian blood upon whom honorary membership has been or may 
in the future be conferred in accordance with an adoption ordinance approved by 
the General Council, Provided, That an honorary member is not entitled to share 
in the distribution of any tribal resources or assets, hold elective office, or 
have voting privileges.

Section 2.  Membership Roll and Enrollment Ordinance.

The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with an 
enrollment ordinance prepared by the Tribal Council and adopted by majority 
vote of the General Council. Such ordinance shall contain provisions for 
enrollment procedures, an enrollment committee, application form, approval and 
disapproval of applications, rejection notices, appeals, corrections, 
adoptions, disenrollment procedures, new member probationary procedures, and 
provisions for keeping the roll on a current basis.

Section 3.  Appeal.

A person making application for enrollment under this Article, Section 1, 
subsections (b.) (Lineal Members) and subsection (c.) (Honorary Members) in 
accordance with the enrollment ordinance adopted by the General Council whose 
application is denied may appeal to the General Council in accordance with the 
enrollment ordinance appeal procedure.

Section 4.  Withdrawal.

Any person who wishes to withdraw from membership in the Colony must 
submit a written withdrawal notice to the Tribal Council Chairperson who shall 
direct the enrollment committee to adjust the enrollment records accordingly.

Section 5.  Revocation.

The Tribal Council shall revoke the membership status of any member whom 
the enrollment committee determines was erroneously, fraudulently, or other
wise incorrectly enrolled. The decision to revoke membership status may be 
appealed to the General Council in accordance with the enrollment ordinance 
appeal procedure.

Section 6.  Enrollment Date and Application.

All persons who have met the requirements of this Article, Section 1, 
subsections (a.) Historical Members, (b.) Lineal Members, or, (c.) Honorary 
Members, are considered as enrolled on the effective date of this Amended 
Constitution and no new application for enrollment will be required.

All persons born after the effective date of this Constitution who meet 
the eligibility requirements of this Article, or other persons who may meet the 
eligibility requirements, must file an application for enrollment in accordance 
with the enrollment ordinance.

Section 7. 

Ineligible Applicants for Membership.

No person shall be eligible for membership in the Colony, except for 
those historical members of the Colony provided for in this Article, Section 
1.a., if that person is a member of another federally recognized tribe.

Section 8.  Forfeiture of Membership.

a.  Except for those historical members of the Colony provided for in this 
Article, Section 1, subsection a., any member of the Colony who becomes a 
member of any other tribe shall automatically forfeit her/his membership in the 
Colony. Any person adversely affected by this section shall have a right to 
appeal in accordance with the enrollment ordinance appeal procedure.

b.  Any person who has lost membership in the Colony because of membership 
in another tribe may apply for reinstatement after a period of two (2) years 
has elapsed from the date of removal from the membership roll, PROVIDED That 
person has given up her or his membership in the other tribe involved, and 
submits written proof of relinquishment to the Tribal Council.

Section 9.  Membership Roll Corrections.

Corrections may be made to any current membership roll by the Tribal 
Council at any time, including but not limited to the adding of persons who 
were inadvertently left off the roll and are otherwise eligible for member
ship, in accordance with the enrollment ordinance adopted by the General 
Council.

Section 10.  Probationary Period.

Persons who make application for enrollment after the effective date of 
this Constitution, or who have enrollment applications pending as of the 
effective date of this Constitution, will be required to serve a probationary 
period in accordance with the enrollment ordinance adopted by the General 
Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1.  Division of Power

The powers of the government of the Colony shall be divided into three 
distinct branches: the General Council, the Tribal Council and the Tribal 
Judiciary. No branch, group or person charged with the exercise of powers 
properly belonging to one of these branches shall exercise any powers belonging 
to one of the other branches, except as otherwise specified in this 
Constitution.

Section 2.  Tribal Council.

a.  The governing body of the Colony shall be the Tribal Council, except 
for the powers specifically retained by the General Council. The Tribal 
Council shall consist of five (5) tribal members eighteen (18) years of age

or older. The five (5) member Tribal Council shall be composed of three (3) 
officers: the Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary/Treasurer, and two (2) 
At-Large Council persons. The five (5) Tribal Council members shall be elected 
by the General Council on an at-large basis to serve staggered terms of two (2) 
years, or until such time as their successors are duly elected and installed.

b.  All members of the Tribal Council shall be able to vote at all Tribal 
Council meetings, at all tribal elections, and on all referenda, initiatives, 
recalls and repeals.

c.  The powers of the Tribal Council and method of election are contained 

in Article V, Section 2, and Article VI.

d.  Not more than two immediate family members may serve on the Tribal 
Council at the same time. For purposes of this section, "immediate family 
member" shall mean mother, father, brother, sister, spouse, or child.

e.  Compensation of Tribal Council members for services rendered while 
conducting tribal business shall be established by ordinance of the General 
Council.

Section 3.  General Council.

a.  The General Council shall consist of all duly enrolled members 
eighteen (18) years of age or older who are enrolled as of the effective date 
of this Constitution or who are later enrolled under the terms and conditions 
of this Constitution.

b.  All members of the General Council who are duly registered and 
qualified to vote shall be able to vote at all General Council meetings, at 
all tribal elections, and on all referenda, initiatives, recalls and repeals.

c.  The powers of the General Council are contained in Article V, 

Section 1.

Section 4.  Code of Ethics.

The General Council, Tribal Council, and Tribal Judiciary shall be 

governed by a Code of Ethics adopted by ordinance of the General Council.

Section 5.  Tribal Judiciary Powers.

The powers of the Tribal Judiciary are contained in Article V, Section 9.

Section 1.  General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - POWERS

 
 a.  All powers of the Colony shall be vested in the General Council, 
subject to any limitation imposed upon such powers by the laws of the united 
States, including those powers delegated to the Tribal Council, and any such 
other powers as may in the future be granted or delegated to the Colony by 
Federal law.

b.  The General Council shall exercise its powers of self-government 
through the initiative, referendum, repeal and recall powers as set forth in 
this Constitution.

c.  The following powers shall be exclusively reserved to the General 
Council. No exercise of these powers by the Tribal Council or by any other 
agency or officer of the Colony shall be effective unless the General Council 
has given its consent to such action in accordance with Article V of this 
Constitution:

1.  No sale, disposition, encumbrance of tribal lands, interest in lands 
or other tribal assets shall be made without the consent of the 
General Council, subject to the provisions of Article V, Section 
2.a.4. (Tribal Council Powers).

2.  The power to regulate any tribal hunting or fishing rights.

3.  The power to revoke, terminate or diminish any right reserved or 

delegated to the Colony by Federal law.

4.  The power to grant or relinquish any tribal jurisdiction to any other 
government, political subdivision of a government agency, 
organization, association or person.

5.  The power to waive the Colony's immunity from suit.

6.  The power to set compensation for Tribal Council members, officers and 

committee members.

7.  The power to assert jurisdiction over juvenile matters pursuant to the 
Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978, Public Law 95-608, 92 Stat. 3069.

d.  All powers that are not expressly mentioned in this document or which 
are not expressly delegated in this Constitution by the General Council to the 
Tribal Council or any other officer or agency of the Colony, shall not be 
abridged but shall be reserved to the General Council.

Section 2.  Tribal Council.

a. The General Council hereby delegates to the Tribal. Council the 
following enumerated powers subject only to those limitations inposed by this 
Constitution and the laws of the United States:

1.  On behalf of the Colony, to consult, negotiate, contract or conclude 
agreements with Federal, state, local and tribal governments and with private 
persons and organizations;

2.  To employ legal counsel of its choice on behalf of the Colony or for 
the benefit of Colony members and to fix the fees for such counsel in 
accordance with Federal law;

3.  To make recommendations to the Secretary of the Interior or to the 
Secretary's authorized representative with regard to all appropriation 
estimates for all projects which are for the benefit of the members of the 
Colony, prior to the submission of such estimates to Congress, other branches 
of the Federal government, or to the State of California;

4.  To borrow money from public and private sources and to pledge, 
mortgage or assign tribal assets except as provided in Sections 4, 5, and 6 
of this Article;

5.  To set aside and to spend Colony funds for Colony purposes;

6.  To enact ordinances subject to approval by majority vote of the 
General Council, inposing taxes on all persons, property and business activi
ties located or conducted within tribal jurisdiction, or on real property held 
in trust by the United States of America for the Colony;

7.  To enact ordinances regulating the use and development of all Colony 
lands, whether assigned or unassigned, and to manage, lease or otherwise use 
all unassigned Colony lands;

8.  To enact ordinances for the chartering and regulation of corporations, 
cooperatives, associations, special districts, housing authorities, educational 
and charitable institutions, political subdivisions and other entities;

9.  To enact ordinances licensing and regulating the conduct of all 

business activities within Colony jurisdiction;

10.  To establish business enterprises as branches or agencies of the 
Colony government and otherwise to engage in business activities and projects 
which promote the economic well-being of the Colony and its members;

11.  To purchase, acquire, encumber, or exchange land in any manner (prior 
to the exchanged land becoming Colony trust land), subject to prior approval by 
majority vote of the General Council and the limiting provisions of this 
Article, Sections 4., 5. and 6. ;

12.  To purchase and acquire other property in any manner, subject to 

prior approval by majority vote of the General Council;

13.  To condemn for Colony purposes real property or interest in real 
property within Colony jurisdiction subject to approval by majority vote of the 
General Council, PROVIDED That:

a) 

the owners of assignments or property condemned by the Tribal Council 

shall be paid for the improvements made thereon by the assignee or owner;

b) 

an assignee of condemned tribal lands shall be assigned alternative 

Colony lands of comparable condition and value;

14.  To enact ordinances providing for the management, development, 
protection and regulation of the use of water, minerals and all other natural 
resources within Colony jurisdiction; 

'

15.  To enact ordinances, or law and order codes governing the conduct 
of individuals, and proscribing offenses against the Colony relating to the 
maintenance of order; the protection of the health, safety and welfare of all 
persons within Colony jurisdiction; and to provide for the enforcement of the 
ordinances, or law and order codes of the Colony;

16.  To enact ordinances providing for the establishment of tribal courts 
 or courts of Indian offenses from time to time as may be required; establish 
the court or courts jurisdiction; and establish procedures and methods for the 
selection of judges, consistent with Article V, Section 9 of this Constitution.

17.  To enact ordinances prescribing conditions under which non-Colony 
members may enter and remain on Colony land, and to establish procedures for 
the exclusion of non-members from any land within the Colony's jurisdiction;

18.  To assert as a defense to lawsuits against the Colony, the sovereign 
immunity of the Colony, except that no waiver of sovereign immunity can be made 
by the Tribal Council without prior approval by majority vote of the General 
Council;

19.  To enact ordinances regulating the domestic relations of members 
of the Colony, including paternity and child support matters, and provisions 
for the guardianship of minors and incompetent persons within colony jurisdic
tion, which shall include a plan of services to ensure the peace, safety, 
health, education and general welfare of the members of the Colony;

20.  To enact ordinances regulating the inheritance of all lands and 
all property owned by persons within Colony jurisdiction and to provide for 
escheat of property to the Colony subject to approval by majority vote of 
the General Council; and PROVIDED. That no law, statute, code or ordinance 
governing the inheritance of property owned by Colony members shall be in 
violation of Federal law;

21.  To enact ordinances consistent with this Constitution establishing 

procedures for the nomination, election, removal and recall of Colony officers;

22.  To enact ordinances for the establishment of Colony employee 
positions, including appointment, supervision, and compensation; and to 
establish policies and procedures for the employment of all tribal personnel;

23.  To enact ordinances for the assignment of Colony land upon approval 

by majority vote of the General Council;

24.  Subject to any limitations contained in this Constitution, to 
delegate any powers vested in the Tribal Council to subordinate Colony 
officers, Colony employees or other appropriate persons, PROVIDED. That no 
power specified to be exercised by enactment of an ordinance may be delegated 
to non-Tribal Council members;

25.  To take all actions which are necessary and proper for the exercise 
of the powers enumerated in this Constitution, and which are otherwise 
consistent with, and in furtherance of, tribal customs, traditions and beliefs, 
and any other powers which may hereafter be vested in the Tribal Council; and

26.  Except as provided in this Constitution, to establish its own rules 

of procedure.

Section 3.  Reserved Powers of General Council.

The Tribal Council shall have all the appropriate powers necessary to 
implement specific provisions of this Constitution and to effectively govern 
tribal affairs. All powers heretofore vested in the Colony, but not specifi
cally referred to in this Constitution, shall not be abridged, but shall be 
reserved to the General Council.

Section 4.  Limited Power of the Tribal Council to Transfer Colony Land 

Held In Trust By the United States of America Out of Colony Ownership.

The Tribal Council shall not exchange or transfer out of Colony owner
ship any land or interests therein that is held in trust for the Colony by the 
United States, unless prior to any such exchange or transfer taking effect, 
the proposed exchange or transfer is first approved by a majority vote of the 
General Council, and approved by the Secretary of Interior.

Section 5. 

Limited Power of the Tribal Council to Encumber Colony Land 

Held In Trust by the United States of America.

The Tribal Council shall not pledge, mortgage, lease or grant licenses to 
use Colony trust land (whether revocable or irrevocable), or otherwise encumber 
Colony land or interests therein if any such land is held in trust for the 
Colony by the United States, unless such action is first approved by majority 
vote of the General Council, and approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Section 6. 

Limited Power of the Tribal Council to Encumber Colony Land 

Not Held In Trust by the United States of America.

a.  Except as permitted by Subsection (b) of this Section 6., the Tribal 
Council shall not pledge, mortgage, lease or grant licenses to use non-trust 
land (whether revocable or irrevocable), or otherwise encumber non-trust Colony 
land or interests therein unless such action is first approved by majority vote 
of the General Council.

b.  The Tribal Council by majority vote may authorize only the following 

encumbrances:

1.  Grants of permission to members of the Colony and qualified non
members in accordance with provisions of this Constitution, to use 
specified portions of tribal land for residential, agricultural, 
commercial or industrial purposes.

2.  Grants of rights-of-way over Colony land or interests therein; for 
the purposes of providing municipal services, such as water, sewer 
disposal, electricity, telephone and roads, to and for the benefit of 
Colony members, or the heirs and descendents of Colony members who 
hold land use assignments or leases.

Section 7.  Limited Power of the Tribal Council to Develop Natural 

Resources.

The Tribal Council shall not develop on a commercial or industrial basis 
any natural resources of the Colony without first obtaining approval by a 
majority vote of the General Council.

Section 8.  Principal of Construction.

Sections 4, 5, 6 and 7 of this Article shall not be construed to deny 
to the Tribal Council its governmental power and authority to regulate 
activities on Colony land for the Colony's general welfare, including, but 
not limited to, zoning, regulation of commercial ventures, fishing, hunting, 
and other sports activities, and for the purpose of promoting the health, 
safety and welfare of Colony members and the conservation and protection of 
Colony resources.

Section 9.  Tribal Judiciary.

a.  Until such time as the General Council determines that the Colony 
is financially and otherwise prepared to maintain a Tribal Judiciary, the 
judicial authority of the Colony shall be vested in the General Council.

b.  At such time as the General Council determines that the Colony shall 
establish and maintain a separate Tribal Judiciary, the judicial powers of the 
Colony shall be:

1.  Vested in a Supreme Court and in such other inferior courts as the 
Tribal Council may from time to time establish. The Colony court system shall 
exercise jurisdiction over all cases and controversies within the Colony's 
jurisdiction, in law and equity, whether civil or criminal in nature, that 
arise under this Constitution, the laws of the Colony, or which is vested in 
the Colony courts by Federal law.

2.  The Supreme Court shall consist of a chief judge, appointed by the 

Tribal Council.

3.  The duties and procedures of the courts shall be determined by the 

Tribal Council pursuant to Colony law.

4.  The tenure and salary of Colony judges shall be established by 

ordinance of the Tribal Council.

5.  No person shall be appointed to the office of Colony judge unless that 
person is at least twenty-one (21) years of age, and has never been convicted 
of a felony, or within one year preceding appointment, of a misdemeanor.

6. 

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused party shall enjoy the right 
to a speedy trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to 
be confronted with the witnesses against him, the right of cross-examination, 
to have corrpulsory process for obtaining witnesses in the accused party's 
favor, and to have the assistance of an advocate for presentation of a defense 
who is admitted to practice before the Colony courts.

7.  The Supreme Court shall hear appeals from the lower courts. The 
Supreme Court's decision shall be final and binding upon all parties to a suit 
and not subject to review.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1.  Election Ordinance.

All Colony elections shall be conducted in accordance with an election 
ordinance enacted by the Tribal Council. The election ordinance shall provide 
for voter registration, validation of election petitions, vote counting,

separate ballots for each elective office, secret balloting, absentee voting, 
nomination of candidates in advance of the election date, an inpartial election 
board selected from outside the Tribal Council that shall be responsible for 
conducting all Colony elections, a procedure for resolving election disputes 
and challenges to the election process, and the seating of Tribal Council 
members immediately after the certification of the election results. The 
election ordinance shall also include provisions for the conduct of recalls, 
referenda, and vacancy elections consistent with this Constitution.

Section 2.  Election Board.

An election board, appointed by the Colony Chairperson and approved by 
majority vote of the Tribal Council, shall supervise and administer all 
elections in accordance with the election ordinance enacted by the Tribal 
Council. No member of the Tribal Council may sit on the election board.

Section 3.  Tribal Council Balloting.

Members of the Tribal Council shall be chosen on an at-large basis by 
secret ballot, the form of which shall be established by the election ordinance 
enacted by the Tribal Council and administered by the election board.

Section 4.  Eligibility.

Any member of the Colony who is duly enrolled and is at least eighteen 
(18) years of age on the date of the election shall be eligible to vote, 
PROVIDED. That the Colony member is duly registered and qualified to vote.

Section 5.  Qualification of Candidates.

Any member of the Colony who is qualified to vote shall qualify as a 

candidate for a position on the Tribal Council.

Section 6. 
Election Procedures.

Term of Office: Present Tribal Council Members And First 

a.  All present Tribal Council officials shall continue to hold office 
until the first general election date following the adoption and ratification 
The first election of Tribal Council members and
of this Constitution. 
officers of the Colony under this Constitution shall be held on the first 
general election date following the effective date of this Constitution. 
Procedures for the first election shall be consistent with the provisions of 
this Article and the election ordinance, which shall be enacted by the Tribal 
Council within three (3) months after the effective date of this Constitution.

b.  At the first at-large election held pursuant to this Constitution, the 
five (5) Colony members receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected 
to the Tribal Council for staggered terms in accordance with the election 
ordinance. The three (3) officers shall be elected for a term of two (2) years; 
the two (2) at-large Council members for a term of one (1) year. Thereafter, 
the candidate's receiving the highest number of votes elected on an at-large 
basis shall fill the vacancy or vacancies for two (2) year terms of office.

Section 7. Candidates, Timing of Elections, and Election Procedures.

a.  Any member of the Colony qualified to vote who desires to be placed on 
the ballot as a candidate for the Tribal Council shall file with the Tribal 
Council Secretary/Treasurer a "Statement of Intent" stating the member's name, 
address, and the description of the position on the Tribal Council for which 
the member seeks to be elected: Chairperson (1 seat); Vice Chairperson (1 
seat); Secretary/Treasurer (1 seat); At-Large Member (2 seats) . This Statement 
of Intent shall be filed thirty (30) days prior to the next scheduled general 
election.

b. 

If only one qualified member files a Statement of Intent for a Tribal 
Council office, a special meeting of the General Council shall be convened for 
the purpose of taking nominations from the floor for a candidate or candidates 
for that office; however, no more than the first three (3) nominations will be 
accepted from the floor for any one position.

c.  General elections to vote for Tribal Council members as terms expire 
shall be held on the third (3rd) Saturday of the month of July as required to 
fill vacancies, and consistent with the election ordinance authorized by this 
Constitution.

d.  Notice of the general elections shall be posted by the Tribal Council 
Secretary/Treasurer at least twenty (20) days before each such election at the
Colony's business office, the voting place, and in three or more additional 
public places. In case the date of the general election should conflict with a 
holiday, the election shall be held on the following work day.

e.  All newly elected Tribal Council members shall assume their offices 

thirty (30) days after the election in which they were elected.

f.  A tie vote shall be decided only by holding a general election within 
thirty (30) days from the date of the previous general election that resulted 
in a tie. Only those candidates receiving the same number of votes shall be 
candidates in the subsequent runoff election. The person receiving the highest 
number of votes shall be elected.

Section 8. Election of Officers and At-Large Members.

After the first election held under this Constitution, the General Council 

shall elect three (3) officers and two (2) at-large members, designated as:

1.  Chairperson;

2.  Vice-Chairperson;

3.  Secretary/Treasurer;

4.  At-Large Member

5.  At-Large Member.

The officers and at-large members shall be elected by a majority vote from 
among those candidates who have filed a Statement of Intent designating the 
Tribal Council position for which the candidate seeks to be elected.

The General Council shall elect the Tribal Council's three officers and 

two (2) at-large members to serve staggered two (2) year terms.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chairperson.

a. The Chairperson shall have the following duties:

1.  To preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council and the 

bi-annual meeting of the General Council;

2.  To vote at Tribal and General Council meetings only when it is 

necessary to break a tie vote;

3.  Subject to the approval of the Tribal Council, to appoint all 
non-elected officials and employees of the Tribal government and 
direct them in their work, subject only to applicable restric
tions embodied in this Constitution or in enactments of the 
Tribal Council establishing personnel policies or Colony 
government personnel management;

4.  Subject to the approval of the Tribal Council, to establish such 
boards, committees, or subcommittees as the business of the 
Tribal Council may require and to serve as a nonvoting member of 
all such committees and boards;

5.  Subject to the approval of all contracts by the Tribal Council, 
to serve as a contracting officer or agent for the Colony 
including the authority to retain legal counsel;

6.  Subject to such regulations and procedures as may be prescribed 
by ordinances enacted by the Tribal Council and subject to 
approval by the Tribal Council, to grant pardons or restore 
Colony members to eligibility for elective office in the Colony 
government;

7.  Subject to such regulations and procedures as may be prescribed 
by ordinance enacted by the Tribal Council to appoint Colony 
judges and Colony law enforcement officials as are from time to 
time required to assure the administration and enforcement of 
Colony laws;

8.  The Chairperson shall hold no other Colony office or engage in 
private remunerative employment which may pose a conflict of 
interest with the Colony's enterprises or business activities 
during the Chairperson's term of office;

9.  To prepare and cause to be published at least five (5) days 
before the biannual General Council meeting, an agenda which 
shall include, but not be limited to:

a)  A report by the Tribal Council Secretary/Treasurer on the 
finances of the Colony government during the six months 
immediately preceding the biannual meeting; and

b)  A list of all the ordinances and laws enacted by the Tribal 
Council during the six months immediately preceding the 
biannual meeting, with a short summary explaining each law. 
During the meeting the Tribal Council Chairperson will ensure 
that this agenda, including the financial report, will be 
available for inspection by any member of the General Council 
upon request. All items on the agenda will be considered by 
the General Council before considering new matters from the 
floor.

ection 2. Vice-Chairperson.

The Vice-Chairperson shall:

a.  With the consent of the Tribal Council, in the absence of the Chair
person, perform all duties and assume all the responsibilities vested in the 
Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall, upon the request of the Chairperson, 
assist in carrying out the duties of the Chairperson.

b.  The Vice-Chairperson shall perform such other duties as the 

Chairperson may direct.

Section 3.  Secretary/Treasurer.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall:

a.  Call the roll, handle all official correspondence of the Tribal 
Council, keep and certify the minutes of all regular and special nestings of 
the Tribal and General Councils, and the Secretary-Treasurer shall submit or 
provide the Election Committee's results of the duly elected officers of the 
Tribal and General Council to the Superintendent of the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, Central California Agency, within fifteen (15) days from the date of 
any election;

b.  Accept, keep and safeguard all funds under the exclusive control of 
the Tribe by depositing then in a bank insured by an agency of the Federal 
government or in an IIM account or Colony trust account with the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, as directed by the Tribal Council and shall keep or cause to 
be kept an accurate record of such funds and shall report on all receipts and 
expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds in his or her custody to 
the Tribal and General Councils at regular meetings and at such other times as 
requested by either Council. The Secretary-Treasurer shall not pay or other
wise disburse any funds in the custody of the Tribal Council except when 
properly authorized to do so by the Tribal Council;

c.  Have the books and records of the Colony audited annually by a 

competent independent auditor employed by the Tribal Council.

d.  Be present at all meetings of the Tribal and General Councils unless 

prevented by illness or circumstances beyond his or her control;

e.  Provide a surety bond in an amount satisfactory to the Tribal Council. 

The cost of the surety bond shall be paid by the Colony;

f.  Sign and approve all checks drawn on Colony funds and all vouchers 
with at least one officer or designated check signer of the Colony in 
accordance with a written procedure approved and adopted by the Tribal Council 
by resolution; and

g. 

In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice Chairperson, with the 
approval of the Tribal Council, the Secretary-Treasurer shall carry out the 
duties of the Chairperson.

Section 4.  Surety Bonds.

The Tribal Council may by resolution require that all responsible tribal 
officials and employees be bended. The cost of the surety bond shall be paid 
by the Colony.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1.  General Council.

All meetings of the General Council shall be held in accordance with the 

following provisions:

a.  The General Council shall hold biannual meetings every six months.

b.  The biannual General Council meetings shall be held on the third (3rd) 
Saturday in January and in July. The Tribal Council may set more frequent 
meetings of the General Council as necessary, PROVIDED it shall publish a 
schedule of all such meetings.

c.  Special meetings of the General Council may be called by the Tribal 
Chairperson or by any member of the General Council who submits a petition 
containing ten (10) signatures of Colony members to the Tribal Council 
requesting a special meeting. The notice in regard to any special meeting 
shall be given at least five (5) days prior to the meeting and shall specify 
the purpose of the meeting.

d.  No business shall be transacted in the absence of a quorum. Thirty 
percent (30%) of the voting members of the General Council shall constitute a 
quorum at all General Council meetings.

e.  All meetings of the General Council shall be open to all Colony 

members.

Section 2.  Tribal Council.

All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held in accordance with the 

following provisions:

a.  The Tribal Council shall meet at least once per month. The Tribal 
Council may schedule additional regular meetings as necessary, PROVIDED. That 
it shall publish the schedule of all such meetings.

b.  A majority of the five (5) members of the Tribal Council shall 
constitute a quorum at all Council meetings. No business shall be conducted in 
the absence of a quorum.

c.  Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the Chair

person or by any three (3) members of the Tribal Council. The notice in regard. 
to any special meeting shall be given at least three (3) days prior to the 
meeting and shall specify the purpose of the meeting.

d.  Each member of the Tribal Council shall have one vote on all matters, 
and all matters to be acted on at a Tribal Council meeting shall be approved or 
disapproved by a majority vote of those present and voting. The Chairperson 
shall vote at Tribal Council meetings only when it is necessary to break a tie 
vote.

e.  All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be governed by written rules 
and procedures established by the Tribal Council, and approved by a majority 
vote of the General Council.

f.  All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be open to all Colony 

members.

ARTICLE IX - ENACTMENT OF LAWS.

Section 1.  Ordinances.

All final decisions on matters of general and permanent interest to 
members of the Colony shall be embodied in ordinances. All ordinances shall be 
available for inspection by members of the General Council during normal office 
hours.

Section 2.  Resolutions.

All final decisions on matters of short term or one time interest where a 
formal expression is needed shall be embodied in a resolution. Other decisions 
of a temporary nature or relating to particular individuals, officials or 
committees shall be put in the form of motions and noted in the minutes and 
  shall be available for inspection by members of the General Council during 

normal business hours.

Section 3.  Record Keeping.

All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and numbered and shall 
include a certification shewing the presence of a quorum and the number of 
members voting for and against the proposed enactment.

Section 4.  Limited Approval by the Secretary of Interior.

The General Council and Tribal Council shall submit Colony enactments 
of laws to the Secretary of the Interior for his review, comment and approval 
only when required to do so by Federal law. The General Council may vote 
to submit any Colony enactment of law to the Secretary of the Interior for 
review, comment and approval when not required to do so by Federal law. 
However, the failure of the General Council to submit any Colony enactment of 
law to the Secretary or the failure of the Secretary to approve any Colony 
enactment of law, when approval is not required by Federal law, shall in no way 
affect the legal validity of such Colony enactment of law promulgated in 
accordance with this Constitution.

Section 1. Vacancy Criteria.

The Tribal Council shall declare a Tribal Council position vacant for any 

of the following reasons:

a.  When a Tribal Council member dies;

b.  When a Tribal Council member resigns;

c.  When a Tribal Council member is convicted of a crime that is classi

fied as a felony by either state or Federal law;

d.  When a Tribal Council member is removed from office;

e.  When a Tribal Council member is recalled from office. If less than 
twelve (12) months of a vacant term remains, the Tribal Council shall 
fill the vacancy by appointment of a General Council member who 
qualifies for candidacy for the vacant position. If more than twelve 
(12) months remain in the vacant term a special election shall be held 
to fill the vacant position. Such a special election shall be held 
within thirty (30) days after the Tribal Council declares the position 
vacant.
 
 

ARTICLE XI  - REMOVAL AND RECALL

 
 Section 1.  Removal.

Any member of the Tribal Council may be removed from office for any of the 

following reasons:

a.  Absence from regular Tribal or General Council meetings three (3) 
successive, unexcused times, or three (3) unexcused times in any twelve (12) 
month period; or

b.  Conviction of a crime involving moral character, which includes 
dishonesty, misrepresentation, intentional acts arising to felonies or gross 
misdemeanors; or

c.  Omission of an act or failure to act or perform a duty of the office 

involving official misconduct; or

d.  Misconduct in office involving a willful unlawful act related to the 

performance of the duties of the office.

1.  Any member of the Colony can request removal of any Tribal Council 
member by submitting a written statement of charges to the Chairperson of the 
Tribal Council, or in the case of a request for removal of the Chairperson, to 
the Vice Chairperson of the Tribal Council. Such written statement must be 
received by the accused Tribal Council member no later than ten (10) days 
before the next regular Tribal Council meeting at which he or she is to appear,

2.  At the next regular Tribal Council meeting following the sub
mission of such written statement, the charging party shall present his or her 
allegations and proof against the accused member of the Tribal Council, and the 
accused member shall be given an opportunity to reply to all charges by 
presenting his or her allegations and proof to the Tribal Council.

3.  After hearing all the charges and proof presented by both sides, 
the Tribal Council shall take a vote on whether the accused member shall be 
removed from office. If a majority of the Tribal Council vote to remove the 
accused Tribal Council member, his or her seat shall be declared vacant. The 
Tribal Council member who is the subject of the removal request shall not vote 
nor serve in his or her capacity as a Tribal Council member in the removal

Section 2.  Recall.

Every person elected to a position cn the Tribal Council or who is an 
elected officer of the Colony shall be subject to recall from such office by 
the General Council as follows:

a.  Any member of the General Council or qualified voter may circulate one 
or more petitions among the eligible voters of the Colony requesting a special 
recall election, which petition(s) shall contain the name(s) of the person(s) 
whose recall is sought and shall state the charges being preferred against such 
person(s) in 25 words or less. If one-third (1/3) of the eligible voters of 
the General Council shall sign the petition(s), such petition(s) shall be 
presented to the Tribal Council Chairperson, or if charges are being preferred 
against the Tribal Council Chairperson, to the vice-chairperson of the Tribal 
Council.

b.  The Tribal Council shall then certify the validity of such signatures 
of eligible voters maintained by the Colony. If the required number of valid 
signatures appear cn the recall petition, the Tribal Council shall call a 
special recall election within sixty (60) days from receipt of the petition(s) .

c.  Within thirty (30) days after the special recall election has been 
established, a General Council meeting shall be held. The charging party shall 
present his or her allegations and proof against the accused member of the 
Tribal Council, and the accused member shall be given an opportunity to reply 
to all charges by presenting his or her allegations and proof to the General 
Council.

d.  The ballot used for a recall election shall contain the question: 
"Shall (name of member(s) be recalled from office on the Bridgeport Indian 
Reservation Tribal Council?". The ballot shall contain a space opposite such 
question in which the words "Yes-No" shall be printed so that the voter may 
indicate with a mark whether he or she wishes to vote for or against the recal1 
of the member(s) so named. In the case of a recall of two (2) or more Tribal 
Council members, there shall be a separate ballot for each member being 
recalled.

e. 

If a majority of the General Council members voting in a special 
recall, election vote to recall the Tribal Council member(s) or any other 
officer(s) of the Colony named on the ballot, and PROVIDED, That two-thirds 
(2/3) of the General Council vote in the special recall election, the General 
Council shall immediately declare the Tribal Council member(s) or officer(s) to 
be recalled from office and his or her seat(s) shall be declared vacant.
 
 

ARTICLE XII REFERENDUM AND REPEAL

 
 Section 1.  Procedure.

Upon receipt by the Secretary-Treasurer of the Tribal Council of a 
petition signed by three (3) Tribal Council members or at least one-third (1/3) 
of the General Council members demanding a referendum or a repeal of any 
preposed or enacted Tribal ordinance, law, or any action undertaken by the 
Tribal Council, the action(s) of the Tribal Council shall be either modified, 
repealed or sustained by the General Council in a general or special election 
to be held within twenty (20) days after receipt of the petition by the Tribal 
Council Secretary-Treasurer.

The election shall be called by the Tribal Council Chairperson and the 
vote of a majority of the members of the General council voting in such 
referendum or repeal shall be conclusive and binding on the Tribal Council 
PROVIDED, That at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the General Council 
are present and cast their ballots. No absentee voting shall be allowed.

Section 2.  Limitation on Referendum and Repeal.

No referendum or repeal conducted pursuant to the provisions of Section 1 
of this Article shall serve to abrogate, modify or amend any properly executed 
contract or agreement approved by the Tribal Council and entered into with 
third parties.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. 

Freedoms Guaranteed.

All members of the Colony shall enjoy without hindrance, freedom of 

worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and association.

Section 2.  Limitations on Constitution.

This constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise 
jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of the Colony as citizens 
of the State of California or the United States.

Section 3. 

Property Rights.

The individual property rights of any member of the Colony shall not be 

altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this Constitution.

Section 4.  Access to Colony Records.

Colony members shall have the right to review all Colony records, 
including financial records, at any reasonable time in accordance with written 
procedures established by the Tribal Council.

Section 5. 

Indian Civil Rights Act. 

'

In accordance with Title II of the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 

Stat. 77) the Colony in exercising its powers of self-government shall not:

a.  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the full exercise of religion, or 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances;

b.  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, 
papers and effects against unreasonable search and seizure, nor issue warrants, 
 but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly 
 describing the place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

c.  Subject any person for the same offenses to be twice put in jeopardy;

d.  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against 

himself;

e.  Take any private property for a public use without just compensation;

f.  Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy 
trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be 
confronted with the witnesses against that person, to have compulsory process 
for obtaining witnesses in that person's favor, and, at that person's own 
expense, to have the assistance of counsel;

g.  Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and 
unusual punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense 
any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of one (1) year 
or a fine of $5000.00 or both;
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs cn /May /& {49+______ , the foregoing Amended Constitution 
of the Bridgeport Indian dolony of the Bridgeport Indian Reservation, Mono 
County, Bridgeport, California, was submitted to the registered voters of the 
Bridgeport Indian Colony and on . was duly (adept eg? re j ected 
by a vote of /D for, and 2L against, and -O ~ cast ballots found 
spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of 
the / members registered to vote cast their ballot in accordance with 
Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I,________________________________ Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of
the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 
as amended, and delegated to me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve the Amended Constitution 
of the Bridgeport Indian Colony of the Bridgeport Indian Reservation, Mono County, Bridgeport, 
California. This Constitution is effective as of this date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this 
approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary 
to Federal law.

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: SEP 2 2 1994

