 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

FOR THE

CACHIL DEHE BAND OF WINTUN INDIANS
OF THE

COLUSA INDIAN COMMUNITY 
CALIFORNIA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED NOVEMBER 23, 1941 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1942 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE CACHIL DEHE 
BAND OF WINTUN INDIANS OF THE COLUSA INDIAN 
COMMUNITY, CALIFORNIA


We, the people of the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indians of the 
Colusa Rancheria, in order to establish a legal community organiza
tion and secure certain privileges and powers offered to us by the act 
of June 18. 1934 (48 Stat. 984), do ordain and establish this Constitu
tion and By-laws.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indians shall 
extend to all lands now within the confines of the Colusa Rancheria 
and the Colusa Reservation, and to such other lands as may herein
after be added thereto.

Article II.  —Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun 

Indians shall consist of:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on a census 
of the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indians, as taken by the Sacra
mento Indian Agency, as of January 5, 1941.

(b) All children born to any member of the Cachil Dehe Band of 
Wintun Indians who is a resident of the Community at the time of 
the birth of said children.

Sec. 2. Any person of one-half or more Indian blood related by 
marriage or descent to members of the Community and who has 
resided in the Community for at least two years prior to date of 
application, and who will help to promote and develop the Com
munity may be adopted as a member of the Colusa Indian Commun
ity upon written application and a two-thirds vote of approval by 
the eligible voters of the Community: Provided, That the Indian 
wife of a non-Indian husband shall not be eligible for adoption.

Sec. 3. A member who remains away from the Community con
tinuously for a period of two years without prior leave of absence 
from the Business Committee shall automatically lose his member
ship and may be reinstated only upon application as prescribed for 
new membership.

Sec. 4. If a female member marries a non-Indian, she will auto
matically lose her membership and will be required to leave the Com
munity within ninety days after written notice has been served upon 
her by the Business Committee: Provided, That this provision shall 
not apply in the case of any marriages consummated prior to the 
approval of this Constitution and By-laws.

Sec. 5. The Community Council shall have the power to promul
gate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior,

setting forth additional requirements for future membership or loss 
of membership in the Community as conditions may warrant.

Article III.  —Governing Body
Section 1. The governing body of the Cachil Dehe Band of Win
tun Indians shall be known as the Colusa Indian Community Council 
which shall be composed of all qualified voters of the band. Thirty 
percent of the eligible voters shall constitute a quorum.

Sec. 2. All enrolled members of the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun 
Indians who are 21 years of age or over and who have maintained 
legal residence in the Community for a period of one year immedi
ately prior to any election are qualified voters at such election.

Sec. 3. The Colusa Indian Community Council shall elect from its 
own members, by secret ballot, (a) a chairman, (b) a vice-chairman, 
(c) a secretary-treasurer, and such other officers and committees as 
may be deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. The Colusa Indian Community Council shall meet on the 

second Tuesday of November and April.

Sec. 5. Within 30 days after the ratification and approval of this 
Constitution and By-laws, a Community Council meeting shall be 
held for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it may 
transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers elected 
at this meeting shall serve until the November meeting, at which 
time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be 
chosen at the November meeting.

Sec. 6. The chairman, or 25 percent of the qualified voters, may, 
by written notice, call special meetings of the Community Council.
Sec. 7. The Business Committee shall consist of the chairman, the 
vice-chairman, and the secretary-treasurer of the Community Coun
cil, and shall perform such duties as may be authorized by the 
Council.

Article IV—Vacancies and Removal

Section 1. Any officer who may resign, die or be removed from 

office shall be replaced at a meeting of the Community Council.

Sec. 2. Any officer convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving 
dishonesty in any Federal, State or Indian Court may be removed 
from office by a majority vote of the Community Council.

Sec. 3. The Community Council may, by a majority vote, remove 
from office any officer of the Council for neglect of duty or gross 
misconduct: Provided, That the accused shall be given an opportu
nity to answer any and all charges at a designated Council meeting. 
The decision of the Council shall be final.

Article V—Powers of the Community Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Community Council of the 
Colusa Indian Community shall exercise the following powers, subject 
to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the 
United States:

(a) To negotiate with Federal, State and local governments;
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of Com
munity lands, interests in lands, or other assets of the Community;
(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to al) 
appropriation estimates for Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Colusa Indian Community prior to the submission of such estimates 
to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Colusa 
Indian Community in accordance with the terms of a charter that 
may be issued to the Community by the Secretary of the Interior;
(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members of the Colusa Indian Community; providing for the man
ner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of Community 
land or interests therein; providing for the levying of taxes and 
appropriation of available Community funds for public purposes; 
providing for the licensing of non-members coming upon the Com
munity for the purpose of hunting, fishing, trading, or other busi
ness, and for the exclusion from the territory of the Community of 
persons not so licensed; and establishing proper agencies for the en
forcement of such ordinances upon the lands of the Colusa Indian 
Community;

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the Community, any of the foregoing powers, reserving 
the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated 
power;

(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and the attached By-laws, regulating the procedure of the Council 
itself and, also, of other Community agencies, officials, or organiza
tions of the Colusa Indian Community.

Sec. 2. Future, Powers.—The Community Council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Council 
by members of the Community or by the Secretary of the Interior 
or any other duly authorized officials or agency of the State or Fed
eral Government.

Sec. 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indians of the Colusa Indian 
Community but not expressly referred to in this Constitution shall 
not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the people 
of the Colusa Indian Community through the adoption of appro
priate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent in charge of 
the Community, who shall, within 15 days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary 
of the Interior, who may, within ninety days from the date of enact
ment. rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by noti
fying the Community Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him within 15 days after its enactment, he 

shall advise the Community Council of his reasons therefor. If 
these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may by a majority 
vote refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may. within ninety days from the date of enactment, approve 
the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall 
become effective.

Article VI—Amendments

Section 1. This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a ma
jority vote of the qualified voters of the Community voting at any 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least thirty percent of those entitled to vote shall 
vote in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until 
it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. At any regular or special Community Council meeting, 
amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be proposed by a 
majority vote at such meeting, the amendment then to be submitted 
to the Secretary of the Interior, who shall thereupon call an election 
upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

BY-LAWS FOR THE CACHIL DEHE BAND OF WINTUN INDIANS OF 
THE COLUSA INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take 
an oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath 
he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of 
the United States and this Constitution and By-laws.

Oath : I 

, do solemnly swear that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; that I will carry out, faithfully and impartially, the duties 
of my office to the best of my ability; that I will promote and protect 
the best interests of my Community in accordance with this Consti
tution and By-laws.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the Community Council and each 
member thereof to promote the general welfare of the members of 
this Community and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this 
Constitution and By-laws.

Sec. 3. Chairman. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside 
over all meetings of the Community Council and carry out all orders 
of the Council.

Sec. 4. Vice-Chairman. In the absence of the regular chairman, 
the vice-chairman shall preside and he shall have all powers, privileges 
and duties of the regular chairman.

Sec. 5. Secretary-Treasurer.—The secretary-treasurer shall keep a 
full report of all proceedings of each meeting of the Community 
Council and of the Business Committee, and shall perform such other 
duties of like nature as the Community Council shall from time 
to time by resolution provide, and shall transmit three copies of the 
minutes of each meeting to the Superintendent in charge of the Com
munity. He shall be the custodian of all moneys which may come 
under the jurisdiction or into the control of the Community Council.

He shall pay out money in accordance with orders and resolutions of 
the Community Council. He shall keep account of all receipts and 
disbursements and shall report the same to the Community Council 
at each regular meeting. He shall be bonded in such amount as the 
Council by resolution shall provide, such bond to be approved by the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The books of the secretary-treas
urer shall be subject to audit or inspection at the direction of the 
Community Council or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Until 
the secretary-treasurer is bonded, the Community Council may make 
such provision for the custody and disbursement of funds as shall 
guarantee their safety and proper disbursement and use.

Article II—Order of Business

Section 1. The order of business at any meeting of the Community 

Council shall be as follows:

1.  Council called to order.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Announcement of members who have reached voting age.
4.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
5.  Reports of committees.
6.  Report of secretary-treasurer.
7.  Reading of communications.
8.  Unfinished business.
9.  New business.
10.  Adjournment.

Article III—Ratification of Constitution and By-laws

This Constitution and By-laws shall be in full force and effect when
ever a majority of the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indians of the 
Colusa Indian Community, voting at an election called by the Secre
tary of the Interior in which at least 30 percent of the eligible voters 
shall vote, shall have ratified such Constitution and By-laws and the 
Secretary of the Interior shall have approved same, as provided in 
the act of June 18, 1934, as amended by the act of June 15, 1935.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 17, 1941, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the Cachil Dehe Band of Wintun Indi
ans of the Colusa Indian Community, and was on November 23, 1941, 
duly accepted by a vote of 25 for, and none against, in an election in 
which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in 
accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 
Stat. 378).

Andrew Mitchell, 
Chairman, Election Board.

F. R. Gonzales,

Secretary, Election Board.

John G. Rockwell,

Field Representative in Charge, Sacramento Agency.
 
 

 
 
 I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby ap
prove the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Cachil Dehe Band 
of Wintun Indians of the Colusa Indian Community.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and 
By-laws will be inapplicable to these Indians from and after the date 
of their adoption thereof.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended October 16, 1941.

William Zimmerman, Jr., 
Acting Commissioner.

Washington, D. C., October 17, 1941.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary.
[seal] 

