 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS  
 
OF THE 
CADDO INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA 
 
 (As ratified June 26, 1976, amended 

January 9, 1982 and June 29, 2002) 
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Caddo Indians of Oklahoma, in order to promote our common 
welfare and to secure for ourselves and our descendants the 
rights, powers and privileges guaranteed to us by the treaties, 
the constitution and the statutes of the United States which were 
initially set forth in the Constitution and Bylaws ratified by 
the tribe on January 17, 1938, do adopt this constitution for the 
Caddo Indians of Oklahoma. Both the 1938 governing document and 
this constitution are pursuant to the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act 
of 1936 (49 Stat. 1967). Any tribal legislation enacted under 
the previous constitution shall remain in effect to the extent it 
is not in conflict with this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I - DEFINITION OF TERMS

 
 (Pursuant to Amendment A, adopted June 29, 2002)

Section 1.  The Caddo Nation of Oklahoma shall be the name of 
this organization. The word "Nation" as used in this document 
shall have the same meaning as "the Caddo Nation".

Section 2.  Caddo Tribal Active Membership shall be the governing 
body of the tribe, composed of all enrolled members at least 
eighteen (18) years of age or over, who have registered to vote. 
They are hereafter referred to as "the membership" in this 
document.

Section 3.  Caddo Tribal Council shall be a representative body 
composed of Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer and 
District Representatives, empowered to act on those matters 
outlined in Article V.

The purpose of this organization shall be:
 
 

ARTICLE II - PURPOSE

 
 Section 1.  To define, establish and safeguard the rights, powers 
and privileges of the tribe and its members and to govern the 
affairs of the tribe.

Section 2. To promote the economic, cultural, educational and 
health status of its members and to preserve and protect the 
heritage and traditions of the tribe, cooperating with the 
government of the United Sates and of the State of Oklahoma to
 
 

 
 
 
 
 accomplish these purposes.

Section 3. To promote the welfare of the tribe and its members 
by all lawful means.
 
 

ARTICLE III - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP 
 
 (pursuant to Amendment I, adopted January 9, 1982, 
Amendment B and Amendment C, adopted June 29, 2002)

The membership of the Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma shall be:

Section 1.  All persons of the Caddo Indian blood who received an 
allotment of land as members of the Caddo Indian Tribe shall be 
hereby declared full blood (4/4) members of the tribe for the 
purpose of computing eligibility of their descendants for 
membership.

Section 2.  All living lineal descendants of allottees eligible 
for membership under the provisions of Section 1 of this article 
born on or before the date of adoption of this Constitution.

Section 3.(a) All persons of at least one-sixteenth (1/16) degree 
Caddo Indian Blood who are descendants of enrolled ancestors, as 

    defined and derived from Section 1, born after the date of the 

adoption of this constitution (June 26, 1976), except those 
persons otherwise entitled to enrollment with the Tribe who elect 
to be enrolled in another tribe.

(b) Only for the purposes of enrollment under this 

section, all persons of at least one-sixteenth (1/16) Caddo 
Indian blood, who elect to be enrolled as a Caddo tribal member, 
shall be allowed to count all quanta of American Indian blood as 
Caddo Indian blood. Caddo tribal enrollment procedures, after 
the passage of the amendment, shall recognize and count all 
amounts of American Indian blood as pertinent to prospective 
tribal enrollees and to their descendants, except those persons 
otherwise entitled to enrollment under this constitutional 
amendment who elect to be enrolled in another tribe.

Section 4. Those persons who are adopted into the tribe in 
accordance with the rules prescribed by the Tribal Council, with 
approval of the membership, and consistent with the United States 
law.

Section 5. Those persons who were eligible for membership in the 
Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma under the previous constitution of 
January 17, 1938, as amended, who were recognized as members 
shall continue to be members without further test of eligibility 
until their deaths or voluntary relinquishment of membership,

provided, however, that these persons shall submit an official 
enrollment application.

Section 6. Those persons who are eligible for enrollment under 
the preceding sections of this article who elect to be enrolled, 
except those persons who have received a share of land or money 
by virtue of having been listed on an approved membership roll of 
another tribe.

Section 7. All qualified Caddo membership applicants shall 
submit a completed official enrollment application. Applications 
for membership must be supported by birth certificates or 
authenticated copies thereof or other records recognized by State 
or Federal Recorders, as required by the circumstances of each 
application. All evidence will be retained by the Caddo Indian 
Tribe to support the record. Tribal membership shall become 
effective upon an affirmative vote of a majority of the Tribal 
Council. Any rejected applicants may appeal to the membership.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY 

 
 (Pursuant to Amendment D, adopted June 29, 2002)

The Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma shall be represented by a Tribal 
Council.

Section 1. Composition. The Tribal Council shall consist of 
four (4) officers elected at large; Tribal Chairman, Vice
Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer and at least four (4), but no more 
than fifteen (15), District Representatives who shall be elected 
by districts.

Section 2. Apportionment. District Representatives shall 
represent voting districts containing substantially equal number 
of members in keeping with the one man, one vote concept. 
Adjustments needed to maintain apportionment shall be made 
pursuant to Article V, Section 1 of this constitution, Powers of 
the Tribal Council. For the first election under this 
constitution the four voting districts shall be, 1. Anadarko, 2. 
Binger, 3. Fort Cobb, 4. Oklahoma City, Oklahoma as 
specifically defined by the Superintendent of the Anadarko Agency 
with consultation and approval by the Executive Committee and in 
accordance with Article VII.

Section 3. Terms of Office. The term of office of a member of 
the Tribal Council shall be for a period of four (4) years or 
until a successor is duly elected and installed in office. The 
four (4) year terms of office will become effective at the July 
2002 Caddo Election. Thereafter, all terms will be four (4)

years. The Tribal Chairman shall be eligible to be elected to 
serve three (3) consecutive terms. At the completion of his/her 
third consecutive term of office, he/she shall not be eligible 
for re-election or appointment to fill a vacancy on the council 
until a period of two (2) years has elapsed. In each of the 
above instances, the term of office shall be for the specified 
time, unless the incumbent is earlier removed or recalled, dies 
or resigns.

Section 4. Qualifications of Candidates and Officers. Al1 
members of the Caddo Indian Tribe who will have reached the age 
of twenty-one (21) years or over by the date of the election 
shall be eligible to become candidates for election to membership 
on the Tribal Council except those persons convicted in a court 
of felony, within two (2) years immediately preceding the 
election or when in office or any Caddo member who is indebted 
delinquently to the Caddo Tribe in excess of two (2) years. 
Candidates for a position as District Representative must 
physically reside within the District they represent. Candidates 
for positions of Tribal Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary and 
Treasurer must be residents of Southwestern Oklahoma which is 
defined as all counties touched by a sixty-five (65) mile radius 
whose beginning point is Anadarko, Oklahoma. Residency within 
the prescribed area must be maintained during the tenure in 
office by District Representatives and officers.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The following powers of the Tribal Council may be 
exercised subject to any restriction contained in Federal or 
State laws, and subject to the approval of the membership.

(a)  To appoint an Election Board consisting of a Chairman, 
Secretary and three (3) other persons, all of whom 
shall be members of the tribe and none of whom shall be 
members of the Tribal Council.

(b)  To change the number of Council members or, in the 

alternative, the boundaries of the voting districts so 
that each council member shall represent substantially 
the same number of members as any other in concurrence 
with an official census which shall be conducted 
annually the Tribal Secretary and Enrollment Clerk with 
the assistance of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

(c)  To pass ordinances, subject to the approval of the 

Secretary of the Interior, governing future membership, 
loss of membership, and the adoption of new members

subject to the limitations contained in this 
constitution.

(d)  To purchase real property and in connection therewith 
to execute a mortgage or encumbrance covering or 
extending only to the property being purchased.

(e)  To borrow money.

(f)  To approve the affiliation of the Caddo Tribe with any 

Inter-Tribal organization.

Section 2. The Tribal Council shall be empowered to exercise on 
its own the following powers, duties and responsibilities, 
subject to any restrictions contained in Federal or State laws.

(a)  To approve or disapprove tribal budgets after reporting 

to the membership in general meetings.

(b)  To establish business functions within the tribal 

government.

 c) To confirm or reject the appointment of persons 

selected by the Tribal Chairman.

(d)  To establish personnel rules, job classifications, and 

rates of pay for all tribal employees.

(e)  To approval all leases of tribal land.

(f)  To establish procedures for the conduct of all tribal 

government and business operations.

(g)  To provide for the establishment and regulation of ad 
hoc committees, subordinate to the council, which may 
conduct tribal business, the committee chairman to be 
appointed by the Tribal Council.

(h)  To employ and pay legal counsel.

(i)  To receive, review and act upon applications for 

membership in order to maintain a correct roll of the 
membership of the tribe. The Tribal Council may 
delegate the clerical work involved in the preparation 
and upkeep of the membership roll to an enrollment 
clerk.

(j)  To approve or disapprove contracts or agreements with

Federal, State or local governments, with private 
persons, or with corporate bodies.

(k)  To appropriate and expend available tribal funds for 
the benefit of the tribe or any of its operations.

(1)  To manage, administer, and direct the operation of 

tribal programs, activities, and services and to report 
to the membership the status of each program.

(m)  To pass such ordinances and resolutions necessary or 

incidental to the exercise of any of the foregoing 
powers and duties.

(n)  To use all funds borrowed by the tribe to finance 

tribal enterprises, to lend the money thus borrowed or 
to promote the welfare of the tribe and its members.

(o)  To prevent any disposition, lease, or encumbrance of 
tribal lands, interest in lands, or other tribal 
assets.

(p)  The officers and district representatives of the Tribal 

Council are empowered to serve as officers and members 
of the Board of Directors of the Caddo Indian Tribe of 
Oklahoma, Inc.

(q)  To provide for the promotion and protection of the 

health, peace, morals, education and general welfare of 
the tribe and its members.

Section 3. Reserve Power. All authority not vested in the 
Tribal Council by this article is reserved to the membership and 
may be delegated to the Tribal Council through appropriate 
amendments to this constitution.

Section 4. Future Powers. In addition to all powers inherent or 
vested in the membership by existing law, the membership may 
exercise or may delegate to the Tribal Council such other powers 
as may in the future be delegated to the tribe by the Secretary 
of the Interior or by any authorized official or agency of the 
Government or Congress.
 
 

ARTICLE VI  - DUTIES OF TRIBAL OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The executive function of the government of the Caddo
Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall be vested in a Tribal Chairman.

Section 2. The Tribal Chairman shall have the following powers, 
duties and responsibilities: 

(a)  To serve as the principal executive officer of the 

tribe.

(b)  To carry out the plans and policies established by the 

Tribal Council.

(c)  To negotiate contracts or agreements with Federal, 

State or local governments, private persons, or 
corporate bodies subject to the approval of the Tribal 
Council.

(d)  To preside over the meetings of the Tribal Council and 

the membership and to vote only in the case of a tie in 
either body.

(e)  To serve as a principal resource of the Tribal Council 
for data, information, methods, evaluations, and 
systems.

(f)  To select employees of the tribe, with approval of the 

Tribal Council pursuant to Article V, Section 2 (b) and 
in accordance with the policies and procedures adopted 
by the Tribal Council to participate in the
selection of department heads.

(g)  To represent the tribe on all public occasions and to 
foster respect for the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma 
in the eyes of the world.

Section 3. Vice-Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, the 
Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of that office. In 
addition, the Vice-Chairman shall provide for the protection and 
maintenance of the property and equipment of the tribe.

Section 4. Secretary. The Secretary shall keep an accurate 
account of all proceedings and official records of the Council 
and membership meetings and shall file a copy of same with the 
Caddo Tribal Office and the Superintendent of the Anadarko Agency 
which shall be open to the inspection of the members of the 
tribe. He shall keep a correct list of all members of the tribe, 
shall certify all accounts or orders of the Council and in the 
absence of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall call meetings to 
order until a Chairman pro tem is selected.

Section 5. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of

all funds in possession of the Council from any source. He shall 
keep an accurate record of all funds and shall disburse the same 
in accordance with the vote of the Council. He shall keep all 
tribal money entrusted to his care in a special account. In 
addition, he shall prepare budgets, budget estimates and 
financial reports to be approved by the Tribal Council. An audit 
shall be filed with the Caddo Tribal Office at the end of his 
term of office. The report of same shall be presented to the 
membership and filed at the Caddo Tribal Office.

Section 6. Bonding. All members of the Tribal Council 
authorized to disburse funds shall be bonded in an amount 
satisfactory to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his 
authorized representative and the Tribal Council who shall select 
an agency to provide such bond. The cost of such shall be paid 
out of tribal money.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Voter Qualifications. All enrolled members of the 
Caddo Indian Tribe, who are eighteen (18) years of age or older 
and who are registered according to the election ordinances 
adopted by the Tribal Council, shall be entitled to vote in any 
tribal election. Persons who will be eighteen (18) years of age 
on or before the date of the election shall be permitted to 
register for voting in such election if they otherwise qualify.

Section 2. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, excluding 
the first one, shall be conducted in accordance with an election 
ordinance, enacted by the Tribal Council consistent with this 
constitution. Such ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, 
absentee voting, advance voter registration, nomination of 
candidates and filing procedures prior to the election date, 
appointment of an impartial election board to be responsible for 
conducting all tribal elections, and a procedure for resolving 
election disputes. Decisions of the election board shall be 
final. Further, it shall require that no write-in votes be 
accepted in any tribal election. Provisions shall 
included regarding the conduct of initiative, recall and
referendum elections and a uniform procedure for submitting
petitions.

Section 3. First Election of Tribal Council Members. As soon as 
practical after the approval and ratification of this 
constitution and bylaws, the Superintendent of the Anadarko 
Agency shall call an election for officers and District 
Representatives. Such election shall be held under rules and 
regulations prescribed by the Superintendent of the Anadarko

Agency and consistent with this constitution. The present 
Executive Committee shall continue to govern until the first 
Tribal Council is elected and sworn in.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII  - FILLING VACANCIES
 
 (Pursuant to Amendment E and Amendment F, adopted June 29, 2002)

section 1. Tribal Chairman. If a vacancy occurs in the office 
of Tribal Chairman and less than one (1) year remains of his term 
of office, the office shall be filled by the Vice-Chairman of the 
Tribal Council who shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired 
term of office in the position of Chairman unless earlier removed 
or recalled. During the period which the Vice-Chairman serves as 
Chairman under these circumstances, the Vice-Chairman's office 
shall not be considered vacant and he shall return to serve the 
unexpired portion of his own term of office upon election and 
installation of a Chairman. If a vacancy occurs in the office of 
Tribal Chairman and more than a year remains of his term of 
office, the Tribal Council shall within sixty (60) days of the 
vacancy, cause to be held a special election in which all 
qualified voters of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma may 
participate for the purpose of filling the vacancy.

Section.2. Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer or District 
Council Representatives. If a vacancy occurs in the office of 
Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer or District Council 
Representative, the vacancy will be filled by the tribal council 
within sixty (60) days. The Appointee will serve until the next 
regular annual election of the tribe. Appointees must meet the 
same qualifications for office as candidates in accordance with 
Article IV, Section 4.

Section 3. Filling of Vacancies in Emergency_Situation(s). If 
unanticipated vacancies occur, wherein, the membership of the 
Tribal Council falls below a quorum, the remaining members of the 
Tribal Council shall immediately conduct a special meeting to 
fill the number of vacancies required to reestablish a quorum. 
Appointee(s) will serve until the next regular annual election of 
the tribe and must meet the same qualifications for office as 
candidates in accordance with Article IV, Section 4. After a 
quorum has been reestablished, if there are other vacancies, 
those positions shall be filled in accordance with Section 2 of 
this Article.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. The members of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma 
shall have the power to establish policy or enact ordinances

consistent with this constitution by petition to the Tribal 
Council bearing the language of the proposed policy or ordinance 
and the signatures of at least fifty (50) of the registered 
voters of the Tribe, provided that, in an election which must be 
called by the Tribal Council and conducted within sixty (60) days 
of the receipt of a valid petition, a majority of the voters who 
cast ballots in such election, so demand. Notice of such 
petition election shall be given to the registered voters at 
least fifteen (15) days prior to such election. The Tribal 
Council shall be bound by the results of such election for at 
least one (1) year from date of that election.

Section 2. The members of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma
shall have the power to reject any action of the Tribal Council 
by petition to the Tribal Council bearing the language of the 
action sought to be rejected and the signatures of at least fifty 
(50) of the registered voters of the tribe provided that, in an 
election, which must be called by the Tribal Council and 
conducted within sixty (60) days of the receipt of a valid 
petition, a majority of the voters voting who cast ballots in 
such election so demand. Notice of such petition election shall 
be given to the registered voters at least fifteen (15) days 
prior to such election. The Tribal Council shall be bound by the 
results of such election for at least one (1) year from date of 
that election.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Caddo Indian Tribe shall enjoy 
without hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, 
assembly, and association.

Section 2. This constitution shall hot in any way alter, 
abridge, or otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the 
members of this Tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the 
United States.

Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the 
Tribe shall not be altered, abridged, or otherwise affected by 
the provisions of this constitution without the consent of such 
individual member.

Section 4. The enumeration of any rights in this article shall 
not be interpreted to limit the rights otherwise guaranteed by 
the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (25 USCA 1302).
 
 

ARTICLE XJ - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this constitution may be proposed by a majority 
vote of the Tribal Council or by a petition signed by fifty (50) 
of the registered voters of the tribe and, if approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior shall be submitted to a vote of the 
adult members of the Tribe in an election conducted pursuant to 
regulations of the Secretary of the Interior. Such amendments 
shall be effective if ratified by a majority of those who cast 
ballots. Copies of any proposed amendment shall be furnished to 
members upon request. Notice of a proposed amendment shall be 
given to the voting population at least thirty (30) days prior to 
an election on such proposal through appropriate publicity.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - RECALL AND REMOVAL

 
 Section 1. Recall and Removal Ordinance. The Tribal Council 
shall enact an ordinance outlining procedures for the conduct of 
a recall meeting of the membership pursuant to Section 2 (a) of 
this article, for the conduct of a hearing by the Hearing Board 
as defined in Article IV of the Bylaws pursuant to Section 2 (b) 
of this article, and for the conduct of a special Tribal Council 
Meeting pursuant to Section 3 of this article. These procedures 
must include an opportunity for the accused to confront his 
accusers and to speak on his behalf in answer to a written 
statement of charges which have been provided to him at least 
fifteen (15) days in advance of the recall meeting of the 
membership, the hearing of the Hearing Board, or the removal 
meeting of the Tribal Council. The ordinance shall also contain 
the provision that any elected or appointed officer missing four 
(4) consecutive meetings of the body of which he is a member, 
without cause acceptable to that body shall forfeit his office.

Section 2. Recall. The recall of a member of the Tribal Council 
may be initiated by a tribal members either by petition or by 
presentation of charges to the Hearing Board. Once an individual 
is subjected to recall proceedings, he shall not again be 
considered for such action until at least six (6) months have 
passed.

(a)  Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least 

fifty (50) of the tribe’s registered voters, it shall
be the duty of the Chairman to call and conduct within 
fifteen (15) days, a special meeting of the membership 
to consider the recall of a member of the Tribal 
Council. Such meeting is subject to quorum provisions. 
Only one (1) member of the council shall be considered 
for recall at any given recall meeting.
 
 

 
 
 (b)  Upon receipt of written charges of misconduct or 

violation of this constitution by a tribal member 
against any member of the Tribal Council, it shall be 
the duty of the Chairman of the Hearing Board to call 
and conduct a meeting of that body within fifteen (15) 
days to decide whether this proposal to recall one (1) 
or more tribal officials shall be denied or submitted 
to the Election Board which shall conduct a recall 
election in accordance with the provisions of the 
election ordinance.

Section 3. Removal. The Tribal Council shall be empowered to 
remove a member of that body from office in accordance with the 
criteria and procedures provided in the ordinance enacted 
pursuant to Section 1 of this article. Such action must be taken 
at a special tribal council meeting called for that purpose.
 
 

BYLAWS

ARTICLE I  - OATH OF OFFICE

 
 Section 1. Each member of the Tribal Council shall take an oath 
of office and pledge himself to support and defend the 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma 
prior to assuming the duties of his office.

The following form of oath shall be given:

I, ____________________________

, do hereby solemnly affirm 

that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States against all enemies, and will carry out faithfully and 
impartially all duties of my office to the best of my ability and 
will promote and protect the best interest of the Caddo Indian 
Tribe in accordance with the tribal constitution and by laws.

The oath of office is to be administered by the Chairman of the 
election board.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Place. All quarterly meetings of the membership of 
the Caddo Indian Tribe and all monthly meetings of the Tribal 
Council and any special meetings of either body shall be held at 
the Binger Community Building, Binger, Oklahoma, unless otherwise 
specified by the Tribal Council. Public notice at least ten (10)  
days prior to the meeting must be given for any change in the
place of a meeting of the membership.

Section 2. Conduct. All meetings shall be conducted in 
accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise 
specified in this Constitution and Bylaws 

Section 3. Quorum. Twenty (20) registered members, excluding 

Tribal Council members shall constitute a quorum to conduct 
business at the quarterly membership meetings or special meetings 
of the membership. A majority of the Tribal Council shall 
constitute a quorum to conduct any business at the monthly Tribal 
Council meetings.

Section 4. Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Tribal 
Council may be called at the discretion of the Tribal Chairman 
and must be called by him upon receipt of a request written from 
a majority of the Tribal Council. Special meetings of the 
membership may be called at the discretion of the Tribal Chairman 
and must be called by him upon receipt of a request written by a 
majority of the Tribal Council or upon receipt of a petition
signed by at least fifty (50) of the registered voters of the 
tribe; provided, however, that a ten (10)-day notice of such 
meetings must be given.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - COMPENSATION

 
 Compensation for Tribal Council, Hearing Board and Election Board 
Members or any other Special Representative officially designated 
by the Tribal Council or the membership shall be as follows, 
subject to the availability of funds.

Section 1. Regular and Special Meetings. Compensation for 
participation of members of the Tribal Council, Hearing Board or 
Election Board in regular or special meetings of those bodies 
shall be established by the Tribal Council at a rate not to 
exceed the amount which is authorized for a twenty-four (24)-hour 
period for employees of the Anadarko Agency of the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs.

Section 2. Official Travel. While in a travel status officially 
authorized by the Tribal Council for the conduct of tribal 
business, tribal representatives shall be compensated as follows:

(a)  Mileage shall be paid in accordance with the rate 

prevailing at the Anadarko Agency, Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, at the time of the travel. The number of 
miles so computed shall not exceed the distance from 
the representative’s point of departure to the 
designated meeting place and return.
 
 

I

 
 (b)  Per diem rates shall be based on the prevailing maximum 
overnight travel rates of the Anadarko Agency. Payment 
shall be computed in quarter day periods beginning at 
midnight, 6:00 a.m., 12:00 noon and 6:00 p.m. Per diem 
shall be paid only while the representative is 

traveling directly to and from the meeting and while 
the meeting is in session.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - HEARING BOARD

 
 Section 1. Composition. The Hearing Board shall be composed of 
five (5) members of the tribe. At the first meeting following 
each annual election the Hearing Board shall select from within 
its membership a Chairperson and a Recorder.

Section 2. Selection. The members of the Hearing Board shall be 
elected by secret ballot pursuant to Article VII in conjunction 
with the election of Tribal Council members.

Section 3. Terms of Office. The term of office of a member of 
the Hearing Board shall be for a period of two (2) years and 
until a successor is duly elected and installed except for the 
first election held under this constitution. At the first 
election, two (2) members of the Hearing Board shall be elected 
for terms of one (1) year and three (3) members of the Hearing 
Board shall be elected for terms of two (2) years. The Hearing 
Board members shall be eligible to serve three (3) consecutive 
terms. At the completion of the third (3rd) consecutive term, a 
Hearing Board member shall not be eligible for election or 
appointment to fill a vacancy on the Hearing Board until a period 
of two (2) years has elapsed. Members of the Hearing Board shall 
not be subject to removal or recall. 

Section 4. Qualifications of Candidates. All members of the 
Caddo Indian Tribe who will have reached the age of thirty-five 
(35) years by the date of the election shall be eligible to 
become candidates for election to membership on the Hearing 
Board, provided that no tribal member may serve at the same time 
as a member of the Hearing Board and as a member of either the 
Tribal Council or the Election Board.

Section 5. Filling of Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the 
Hearing Board, the Tribal Council shall appoint a successor to 
fill the vacancy, who shall be qualified according to Section 4 
of this article, to serve until the next regular election.

Section 6. Duties. Action of the Hearing Board shall be 
initiated by a written statement of charges against one (1) or

more members of the Tribal Council requesting that a recall 
election be conducted. The hearing shall be conducted pursuant 
to an ordinance enacted by the Tribal Council in accordance with 
Article XII of the constitution. All decisions of the Hearing 
Board as to whether or not the Election Board shall be instructed 
to conduct a recall election shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws shall be effective when approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of 
the adult members of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma voting in 
an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior under rules and regulations which he may prescribe 
pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 
June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I,(sqd) Morris Thompson, Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of 
the Interior by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), as 
amended and delegated to me by 230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve the 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma.

(sgd) Morris Thompson

Commissioner of Indian Affairs 

Washington, D. C.

Date: April 13, 1976

Ratified on June 26, 1976

UPDATED: April 17, 2003
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
CADDO INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Amendment I

Sections 2 and 3 of Article III - Tribal Membership, of the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall be amended to 
read as follows:

Section 2. All living lineal descendants of allottees 
eligible for membership under the provisions of Section 1 
of this Article born on or before the date of adoption 
of this constitution.

Section 3. All persons of at least one-eighth (1/8) 
degree Caddo Indian blood as defined and derived from 
Section 1, born after the date of the adoption of this 
constitution, except those persons otherwise entitled 
to enrollment who elect to be enrolled in another tribe.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Stanley Speaks, Area Director, do hereby approve the foregoing 

Amendment I to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian 

Tribe of Oklahoma, pursuant to authority delegated to the Assistant 

Secretary - Indian Affairs by Secretarial Order No. 3010, 42 F.R.

53682 and redelegated to the Area Director by 10 BIAM 3.1, 40 F.R.

17046.

Anadarko, Oklahoma
Date: 10/26/81
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Area Director 

on October 26, 1981, the attached Amendment of the Caddo Indian

Tribe of Oklahoma was submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe 

and on January 9, 1982 , was duly ratified by a vote of

 123 for and 85 against and 1 cast ballots found spoiled

or mutiliated in an election of the 454 members entitled to 

vote, cast their ballot in accordance with 49 Stat. 1967.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved April 13 

, 1976, by the

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the 

attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of 

Oklahoma, was submitted for ratification to the eligible voters of 

the Caddo Indian Tribe and was on June 26, 1976, duly 

ratified by a vote of 87 for, and 65 against, in

an election duly called for that purpose.

United States Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Southern Plains Region 
P. O. Box 368 
Anadarko, Oklahoma 73005
 
 

MEMORANDUM

 
 AUG 22 2002

To: Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

From: Regional Director, Southern Plains Region
Attn: Tribal Government Services

Subject: Secretarial Election Results for Caddo Indian Tribe Of Oklahoma

Attached is a copy of the Certificate of Results of Election for the 
Secretarial Election held June 29, 2002, on six (6) proposed amendments 
to the tribal constitution for the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma. The six 
(6) proposed amendments were ratified as follows:

Proposed Amendment A ratified as Amendment No. II with 
133 votes for, 34 against and 9 spoiled ballots.

Proposed Amendment B ratified as Amendment No. Ill with 
180 votes for, 37 against and 8 spoiled ballots.

Proposed Amendment C ratified as Amendment No. IV with 
173 votes for, 45 against and 8 spoiled ballots.

Proposed Amendment D ratified as Amendment No. V with 
131 votes for, 87 votes against and 9 spoiled ballots.

Proposed Amendment E ratified as Amendment No. VI with 
180 votes for, 37 votes against and 9 spoiled ballots.

Proposed Amendment F ratified as Amendment No. VII with 
177 votes for, 38 votes against and 10 spoiled ballots.

The election was conducted entirely by absentee ballots. Each 
amendment was printed on a separate color coded sheet with the current 
and the proposed language clearly differentiated. Several returned 
absentee ballot envelopes did not contain all six ballots. That is the 
reason total ballots cast for the individual amendments differ.

There were 377 registered voters with 227 eligible voters casting ballots 
which calculates to 60% participation. Under the authorization letter dated 
March 18, 2002, the document became effective the date of ratification, 
June 29, 2002. There were no challenges to the election.

Copies of the amendments to the constitution are also attached. If you 
have any questions, contact Terry Bruner or Suzanne Chaney, 
405-247-6673, extension 209 or 237, respectively.

Attachments

cc: 

Chairman, Caddo Nation
Superintendent, Anadarko Agency
Deputy Regional Director
RD's file copies
Subject/chrony(C:\BACKUP\Caddo_to_CO.wpd)

SCHANEY: 7/31/02

United States Department of the Interior 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Southern Plains Region
P. 0. Box 368 
Anadarko,' Oklahoma 73005
 
 

MEMORANDUM 

 
 18 MAR 2002

To: Superintendent

Anadarko Agency

From: Southern Plains Regional Director
Attn: Tribal Government Services

Subject: Authorization to Call and Conduct a Secretarial Election - Caddo Indian Tribe of 

Oklahoma

On March 5, 2002, the Caddo Tribal Council enacted Resolution 
No. 03-2002-01, to propose four (4) amendments to its Constitution and 
Bylaws. The resolution also request the Secretary authorize an election 
to allow the Caddo tribal members the opportunity to vote on the 
proposed amendments. The four (4) proposed amendments are as 
follows:
 
 

AMENDMENT A

ARTICLE I - DEFINITION OF TERMS

 
 Section 1. The Caddo Nation of Oklahoma shall be the name of 
this organization. The word “Nation” as used in this document 
shall have the same meaning as “the Caddo Nation.”

If approved all references to the name of the tribe in the constitution 
would also be changed.
 
 

AMENDMENT B

ARTICLE III - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 3. (a) All persons of at least one-sixteenth (1/16) degree 
Caddo Indian Blood who are descendants of enrolled 
ancestors, as defined and derived from Section 1, born after the 
date of the adoption of this constitution (June 26, 1976), except 
those persons otherwise entitled to enrollment with the Tribe 
who elect to be enrolled in another tribe.
 
 

AMENDMENT C

ARTICLE III - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 3. (b) Only for the purposes of enrollment under this 
section, all persons of at least one-sixteenth (1/16) Caddo Indian 
blood, who elect to be enrolled as a Caddo tribal member, shall 
be allowed to count all quanta of American Indian blood as 
Caddo Indian blood. Caddo tribal enrollment procedures, after 
the passage of the amendment, shall recognize and count all 
amounts of American Indian blood as pertinent to prospective 
tribal enrollees and to their descendants, except those persons 
otherwise entitled to enrollment under this constitutional 
amendment who elect to be enrolled in another tribe.
 
 

AMENDMENT D

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 3. Terms of Office. The term of office of a member of 
the Tribal Council shall be for a period of four (4) years or until 
a successor is duly elected and installed in office. The four (4) 
year terms of office will become effective at the July 2002 
Caddo Election. Thereafter, all terms will be four (4) years. The 
Tribal Chairman shall be eligible to be elected to serve three (3) 
consecutive terms. At the completion of his/her third 
consecutive term of office, he/she shall not be eligible for re
election or appointment to fill a vacancy on the council until a 
period of two (2) years has elapsed. In each of the above 
instances, the term of office shall be for the specified time, 
unless the incumbent is earlier removed or recalled, dies or 
resigns.

The amendments are hereby approved pursuant to the authority 
delegated to the Regional Director by 209 DM 8 and 10 BIAM 3.1. The 
amendments will become effective when ratified by the adultmembers as 
provided in Article XI - Amendments of the tribe’s current constitution.

You are authorized to call and conduct the requested election. Voting on 
the proposed amendments shall be conducted in accordance with the 
regulations in 25 CFR  81, and consistent with the amendment provision 
of the tribe’s constitution. Note, 25 CFR  81.11,81.12, 81.13 and 81.14, 
regarding the need to develop a list of persons eligible and registered to 
vote and the deadlines entitled. The registration list must be posted at 
least twenty (20) days prior to the election which does not include the 
dates of posting and election day.

The date of the election shall be set by the Chairman of the Election 
Board in cooperation with tribal representatives and shall not be less 
than thirty (30) days nor more than sixty (60) days from the date of 
posting notices of the election. Section 61.8 provides for an election 
board composed of a chairman and at least two (2) representatives of the 
tribe. The election board shall furnish suitable ballots and supervise the 
election. Chairman of the election board is normally the agency 
Superintendent or the agency Tribal Government Services Officer.

Once the authorization has been granted by the Secretary or his 
authorized representative, no modification, including correction, deletion 
or retyping of the authorized version of the proposed amendments shall 
be made by the Agency Office. In accordance with 25 CFR  81.5(F), this 
authorization becomes null and void unless acted upon within ninety (90) 
days from the date of issuance.

Once the election is completed, forward a copy of the proposed 
amendments, a copy of the completed certificate of results of election, 
the eligible voter’s list, the voter’s packet, a copy of the ballot and any 
challenges to the Southern Plains Regional Office Branch of Tribal 
Government Services.

If you have any questions, contact Terry Bruner or Suzanne Chaney, at 
247-6673 extensions 209 and 237, respectively.

DATE:
 
 

REPLY TO

 
 ATTN OF: 

JUL 1 7 2002

Superintendent, Anadarko Agency

subject: 

Secretarial Election, Caddo Nation
 
 

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

 
 memorandum

to: 

Regional Director, Southern Plains Regional Office
Attention: Tribal Government Services

Attached are the certificate of results and other required copies of documents of the Secretarial 
Election which was conducted on June 29, 2002 for the Caddo Nation on the proposed 
amendments to the Tribe's Constitution.

There were no protests filed.

In accordance with the Secretary's regulations contained in the 25 CFR, Part 81, six of the six 
proposed amendments, namely, Amendment A, Article I - DEFINITION OF TERMS, Number H, 
Amendment B, Article III - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP, Number III, Amendment C, Article III - TRIBAL 
MEMBERSHIP, Number IV, Amendment D, Article IV - GOVERNING BODY, Number V, 
Amendment E, Article VI - FILLING OF VACANCIES, Number V! and Amendment F, Article VIII - 
FILLING OF VACANCIES IN EMERGENCY SITUATIONS, Number VII were ratified by a majority 
of the votes cast.

If you have any questions, please call Freida Satepeahtaw, extension 249 or Lisa Silverhorn,
extension 221.
 
 

  
 
 