 
  
 AMENDMENT 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE

CADDO INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT

 
 Article II of the Tribal Constitution and Bylaws shall be amended to read as follows:

SEC. 1. The membership of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall consist of 

all living original Caddo allottees and the living direct descendants by blood of all 
original Caddo allottees, except the following persons:

(a) Those persons otherwise entitled to enrollment who elect to be enrolled with 
another tribe.

(b) Those persons otherwise entitled to enrollment who have received any payments 
in land or money by virtue of having been enrolled with some other tribe.

SEC. 2. Those persons who prior to the adoption of the Amendment were 

recognized as members or entitled to membership in accordance with Sections 1 to 5, 
inclusive, of Article II of the Constitution of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma 
ratified on January 17, 1938, who do not fall within the provisions of Section 1 of this 
Article shall continue to be members of or entitled to membership in the tribe until 
their deaths or voluntary relinquishment of membership made in writing to the 
Executive Committee.

SEC. 3. The Executive Committee shall prepare and maintain a current roll of the 

membership of the tribe based upon the rules set forth in Section 1 of this Article.

SEC. 4. The Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations, subject to 

the review of the Secretary of the Interior, covering future membership, including 
adoption, expulsion, and loss of membership.

I, Felix E. Wormser, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 
America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 
1967), do hereby approve the above amendment to the Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma.

FELIX E. WORMSER

Assistant Secretary of the Interior
 
  
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 WASHINGTON, D. C., September 27, 1956. 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved on September 27, 1956, by the Assistant Secretary of 
the Interior, the atttached Amendment II to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo 
Indian Tribe of Oklahoma was submitted for ratification to the adult members of the 
Tribe, and on November 23, 1956, was duly adopted by a vote of 145 for, and 13 
against, in accordance with Article XI of the Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo 
Indian Tribe of Oklahoma.
 
  
  
 

LLOYD TOUNWIN

 
 Chairman, Caddo Tribal Executive Committee 
 

ANDREW DUNLAP

 
 Secretary, Caddo Tribal Executive Committee
 
 

WILL PITNER

 
 Area Director, Anadarko Area Office

