DATE DOWNLOADED: Mon Mar 14 15:33:02 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma (1976).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution & Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma (1976).

APA 7th ed.
(1976). Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution & Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma (S.I.: s.n., 1976)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma (s.n., 1976

MLA 9th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

CADDO INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

OF THE

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Caddo Indians of Oklahoma, in order to promote our common 
welfare and to secure for ourselves and our descendants the rights, 
powers and privileges guaranteed to us by the treaties, the constitution 
and the statutes of the United States which were intially set forth in 
the Constitution and Bylaws ratified by the tribe on January 17, 1938, 
do adopt this constitution for the Caddo Indians of Oklahoma. Both 
the 1938 governing document and this constitution are pursuant to the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 1936 (49 Stat. 1967). Any tribal 
legislation enacted under the previous constitution shall remain in 
effect to the extent it is not in conflict with this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - DEFINITION OF TERMS

 
 Section 1. The Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall be the name 
of this organization. The words "Indian Tribe" as used in this 
document shall have the same meaning as "the Caddo Indian Tribe of 
Oklahoma". 

Sec. 2. Caddo Tribal Active Membership shall be the governing body 
of the tribe, composed of all enrolled members at least eighteen (18) 
years of age or over, who have registered to vote. They are hereafter 
referred to as "the membership" in this document.

Sec. 3. Caddo Tribal Council shall be a representative body composed 
of Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer and District 
Representatives, empowered to act on those matters outlined in Article 
V.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - PURPOSE

 
  The purpose of this organization shall be:

Section 1. To define, establish and safeguard the rights, powers and 
privileges of the tribe and its members and to govern the affairs of 
the tribe.

Sec. 2. To promote the economic, cultural, educational and health 
status of its members and to preserve and protect the heritage and 
traditions of the tribe, cooperating with the government of the United 
States and of the State of Oklahoma to accomplish these purposes.

Sec. 3. To promote the welfare of the tribe and its members by all 
lawful means.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP

 
 The membership of the Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma shall be:

Section 1. All persons of Caddo Indian blood who received an allotment 
of land as members of the Caddo Indian Tribe shall be hereby declared 
full blood (4/4) members of the tribe for the purpose of computing 
eligibility of their descendants for membership.

Sec. 2. All living lineal descendants of allottees eligible for membership 
under the provisions of Section 1 of this article born on or before the 
date of adoption of this constitution, at least one of whose parents is 
a member of the Caddo Indian Tribe.

Sec. 3. All persons of at least one-eighth (1/8) degree Caddo Indian 
blood as defined by and derived from Section 1, born after the date 
of the adoption of this constitution to a member of the tribe, except 
those persons otherwise entitled to enrollment who elect to be 
enrolled in another tribe.

Sec. 4. Those persons who are adopted into the tribe in accordance 
with rules prescribed by the Tribal Council, with approval of the 
membership, and consistent with United States law.

Sec. 5. Those persons who were eligible for membership in the 
Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma under the previous constitution of 
January 17, 1938, as amended, who were recognized as members shall 
continue to be members without further test of eligibility until their 
deaths or voluntary relinquishment of membership, provided, however, 
that these persons shall submit an official enrollment application.

Sec. 6. Those persons who are eligible for enrollment under the 
preceding sections of this article who elect to be enrolled, except 
those persons who have received a share of land or money by virtue 
of having been listed on an approved membership roll of another tribe.

Sec. 7. All qualified Caddo membership applicants shall submit a 
completed official enrollment application. Applications for member
ship must be supported by birth certificates or authenticated copies 
thereof or other records recognized by State or Federal Recorders, 
as required by the circumstances of each application. All evidence 
will be retained by the Caddo Indian Tribe to support the record. 
Tribal membership shall become effective upon an affirmative vote of 
a majority of the Tribal Council. Any rejected applicants may appeal 
to the membership.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 The Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma shall be represented by a Tribal Council.

Section 1. Composition. The Tribal Council shall consist of four 
(4) officers elected at large; Tribal Chairman, Vice-Chairman, 
Secretary, Treasurer and at least four (4), but no more than fifteen 
(15), District Representatives who shall be elected by districts.

Sec. 2. Apportionment District Representatives shall represent 
voting districts containing substantially equal numbers of members in 
keeping with the one man, one vote concept. Adjustments needed to 
maintain apportionment shall be made pursuant to Article V, Section 
1 of this constitution, Powers of the Tribal Council. For the first 
election under this constitution the four voting districts shall be, 
1. Anadarko, 2. Binger, 3. Fort Cobb, 4. Oklahoma City, Oklahoma 
as specifically defined by the Superintendent of the Anadarko Agency 
with consultation and approval by the Executive Committee and in 
accordance with Article VII.

Sec. 3. Terms of Office. The term of office of a member of the 
Tribal Council shall be for a period of two (2) years or until a 
successor is duly elected and installed in office except for the first 
election held under this constitution. At the first election the Tribal 
Chairman and Treasurer and the District Representatives of Oklahoma 
City and Binger shall serve two (2) years. The Vice-Chairman, Secretary 
and the District Representatives from Anadarko and Fort Cobb shall 
serve one (1) year. Thereafter, all terms will be two (2) years. The 
Tribal Chairman shall be eligible to be elected to serve three consecutive 
terms. At the completion of his third consecutive term of office, 
he shall not be eligible for re-election or appointment to fill a vacancy 
on the council until a period of two (2) years has elapsed. In each 
of the above instances, the term of office shall be for the specified 
time, unless the incumbent is earlier removed or recalled, dies, or 
re signs.

Sec. 4. Qualifications of Candidates and Officers. All members of the 
Caddo-Indian Tribe who willhave reached the age of twenty-one (21) 
years or over by the date of the election shall be eligible to become 
candidates for election to membership on the Tribal Council except 
those persons convicted in a court of felony, within two (2) years 
immediately preceding the election or when in office or any Caddo member 
who is indebted delinquency to the Caddo Tribe in excess of two (2) 
years. Candidates for a position as District Representative must 
physically reside within the District they represent. Candidates for 
positions of Tribal Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary and Treasurer 
must be residents of Southwestern Oklahoma which is defined as all 
counties touched by a sixty-five (65) mile radius whose beginning point 
is Anadarko, Oklahoma. Residency within the prescribed area must 
be maintained during the tenure in office by District Representatives and 
officers.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The-following powers of the Tribal Council maybe exercised 
subject to any restriction contained in Federal or State laws, and 
subject to the approval of the membership.

(a)  . To appoint an Election Board consisting of a Chairman, 
Secretary and three (3) other persons, all of whom shall be 
members of the tribe and none of whom shall be members of 
the Tribal Council.

(b)  To change the number of Council members or, in the 
alternative, the boundaries of the voting districts so that 
each council member shall represent substantially the 
same number of members as any other in concurrence 
with an official census which' shall be conducted annually 
by the Tribal Secretary and Enrollment Clerk with the 
assistance of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

(c)  To pass ordinances, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, governing future membership, 
loss of membership, and the adoption of new members 
subject to the limitations contained in this constitution.

(d)  To purchase real property and in connection therewith 
to execute a mortgage or encumbrance covering or extending 
only to the property being purchased.

(e)  To borrow money.

(f)  To approve the affiliation of the Caddo Tribe with any 
Inter-Tribal organization.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall be empowered to exercise on its own 
the following powers, duties and responsibilities, subject to any 
restrictions contained in Federal or State laws.

(a)  To approve or disapprove tribal budgets after reporting 
to the inember ship in general meetings.

(b)  To establish business functions within the tribal govern
ment. 

(c)  To confirm or reject the appointment of persons selected 
by the Tribal Chairman.

(d) To establish personnel rules, job classifications, and rates 
of pay for all tribal employees.

(e) To approve all leases of tribal land.

(f)  To establish procedures for the conduct of all tribal 
government and business operations.

(g)  To provide for the establishment and regulation of ad hoc 
committees, subordinate to the council, which may conduct 
tribal business, the committee chairman to be appointed by the 
Tribal Council.

(h)  To employ and pay legal counsel.

(i)  To receive, review and act upon applications for member
ship in order to maintain a correct roll of the membership of 
the tribe. The Tribal Council may delegate the clerical work 
involved in the preparation and upkeep of the membership 
roll to an enrollment clerk.

(j)  To approve or disapprove contracts or agreements with 
Federal, State or local governments, with private persons, 
or with corporate bodies.

(k)  To appropriate and expend available tribal funds for the 
benefit of the tribe or any of its operations.

(1)  To manage, administer, and direct the operation of tribal 
programs, activities, and services and to report to the member
ship the status of each program.

(m)  To pass such ordinances and resolutions necessary or 
incidental to the exercise of any of the foregoing powers and 
duties.

(n)  To use all funds borrowed by the tribe to finance tribal 
enterprises, to lend the money thus borrowed or to promote 
the welfare of the tribe and its members.

(o)  To prevent any disposition lease or encumbrance of 
tribal lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets.

(p)  The officers and district representatives of the Tribal 
Council are empowered to serve as officers and members of 
the Board of Directors of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma, 
Inc.

(q)  To provide for the promotion and protection of the health, 
peace, morals, education and general welfare of the tribe and 
its members.

Sec. 3. Reserve Power. All authority not vested in the Tribal Council 
by this article is reserved to the membership and may be delegated to 
the Tribal Council through appropriate amendments to this constitution.

Sec. 4. Future Powers. In addition to all powers inherent or vested 
in the membership by existing law, the membership may exercise or 
may delegate to the Tribal Council such other powers as may in the 
future be delegated to the tribe by the Secretary of the Interior or by 
any authorized official or agency of the Government or Congress.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - DUTIES OF TRIBAL OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The executive function of the government of the Caddo 
Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall be vested in a Tribal Chairman.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Chairman shall have the following powers, duties 
and responsibilities:

(a)  To serve as the principal executive officer of the tribe.

(b)  To carry out the plans and policies established by 
the Tribal Council.

(c)  To negotiate contracts or agreements with Federal, 
State or local governments, private persons, or corporate 
bodies subject to the approval of the Tribal Council.

(d)  To preside over the meetings of the Tribal Council and 
the membership and to vote only in the case of a tie in either 
body.

(e)  To serve as a principal resource of the Tribal Council 
for data, information, methods, evaluations, and systems.

(f)  To select employees of the tribe, with approval of the 
Tribal Council pursuant to Article V, Section 2. (b) and in 
accordance with the policies and procedures adopted by the 
Tribal Council, and to participate in the selection of 
department heads.

(g)  To represent the tribe on all public occasions and to 
foster respect for the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma in the 
eyes of the world.

Sec. 3. Vice-Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice
Chairman shall perform the duties of that office. In addition, the 
Vice-Chairman shall provide for the protection and maintenance of 
the property and equipment of the tribe.

Sec. 4. Secretary. The Secretary shall keep an accurate account 
of all proceedings and official records of the Council and membership 
meetings and shall file a copy of same with the Caddo Tribal Office 
and the Superintendent of the Anadarko Agency which shall be open to 
the inspection of the members of the tribe. He shall keep a correct 
list of all members of the tribe, shall certify all accounts or orders 
of the Council and in the absence of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman 
shall call meetings to order until a Chairman pro tem is selected.

Sec. 5. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all 
funds in possession of the Council from any source. He shall keep 
an accurate record of all funds and shall disburse the same in 
accordance with the vote of the Council. He shall keep all tribal 
money entrusted to his care in a special account. In addition, he 
shall prepare budgets, budget estimates and financial reports to be 
approved by the Tribal Council. An audit shall be filed with the

Caddo Tribal Office at the end of his term of office. The report of 
same shall be presented to the membership and filed at the Caddo 
Tribal Office.

Sec. 6. Bonding. All members of the Tribal Council authorized to 
disburse funds shall be bonded in an amount satisfactory to the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his authorized representative and 
the Tribal Council who shall select an agency to provide such bond. 
The cost 'of such shall be paid out of tribal money.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Voter Qualifications. All enrolled members of the Caddo 
Indian Tribe, who are eighteen (18) years of age or older and who are 
registered according to the election ordinances adopted by the Tribal 
Council, shall be entitled to vote in any tribal election. Persons who 
will be eighteen (18) years of age on or before the date of the election 
shall be permitted to register for voting in such election if they 
otherwise qualify.

Sec. 2. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, excluding the first 
one, shall be conducted in accordance with an election ordinance, 
enacted by the Tribal Council consistent with this constitution. Such 
ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, absentee voting, advance 
voter registration, nomination of candidates and filing procedures prior 
to the election date, appointment of an impartial election board to be 
responsible for conducting all tribal elections, and a procedure for 
resolving election disputes. Decisions of the election board shall be 
final. Further, it shall require that no write-in votes be accepted 
in any tribal election. Provisions shall also be included regarding 
the conduct of initiative, recall and referendum elections and a uniform 
procedure for submitting petitions.

Sec. 3. First Election of Tribal Council Members. As soon as practical 
after the approval and ratification of this constitution and bylaws, the 
Superintendent of the Anadarko Agency shall call an election for officers 
and District Representatives. Such election shall be held under rules and 
regulations prescribed by the Superintendent of the Anadarko Agency and 
consistent with this constitution. The present Executive Committee shall 
continue to govern until the first Tribal Council is elected and sworn in.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - FILLING OF VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Tribal Chairman. If a vacancy occurs in the office of 
Tribal Chairman and less than one (1) year remains of his term of 
office, the office shall be filled by the Vice-Chairman of the Tribal 
Council who shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term of 
office in the position of Chairman unless earlier removed or recalled. 
During the period which the Vice-Chairman serves as Chairman under 
these circumstances, the Vice-Chairman’s office shall not be considered 
vacant and he shall return to serve the unexpired portion of his own 
term of office upon election and installation of a Chairman. If a 
vacancy occurs in the office of Tribal Chairman and more than a year 
remains of his term of office, the Tribal Council shall within sixty 
(60) days of the vacancy, cause to be held a special election in which 
all qualified voters of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma may parti
cipate for the purpose of filling the vacancy.

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer or District Council 
Representatives. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Vice-Chairman, 
Secretary, Treasurer or District Council Representative, the office 
shall remain vacant until the next regular annual election of the tribe. 
If the term of the vacant position does not expire at the next regular 
annual election, the vacancy will be filled for the unexpired portion 
of the term. In the event the vacancy occurs in the office of the 
Secretary or the Treasurer, the council shall select one of its members 
to perform the duties of the vacant office until such vacancy is filled.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. The members of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall

have the power to establish policy or enact ordinances consistent with 
this constitution by petition to the Tribal Council bearing the language 
of the proposed policy or ordinance and the signatures of at least fifty 
(50) of the registered voters of the Tribe, provided that, in an election, 
which must be called by the Tribal Council and conducted within sixty 
(60) days of the receipt of a valid petition, a majority of the voters 
who cast ballots in such election, so demand. Notice of such petition 
election shall be given to the registered voters at least fifteen (15) 
days prior to such election. The Tribal Council shall be bound by 
the results of such election for at least one (1) year from date of 
that election.

Sec. 2. The members of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall 
have the power to reject any action of the Tribal Council by petition 
to the Tribal Council bearing the language of the action sought to be 
rejected and the signatures of at least fifty (50) of the registered voters 
of the tribe provided that, in an election, which must be called by the 
Tribal Council and conducted within sixty (60) days of the receipt of a 
valid petition, a majority of the voters voting who cast ballots in such 
election so demand. Notice of such petition election shall be given to 
the registered voters at least fifteen (15) days prior to such election. 
The Tribal Council shall be bound by the results of such election for 
at least one (1) year from date of that election.
 
 

ARTICLE X - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Caddo Indian Tribe shall enjoy without 
hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, 
and association.

Sec. 2. This constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge, or other
wise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of this Tribe 
as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the United States.

Sec. 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Tribe shall 
not be altered, abridged, or otherwise affected by the provisions of this 
constitution without the consent of such individual member.

Sec. 4. The enumeration of any rights in this article shall not be 
interpreted to limit the rights otherwise guaranteed by the Indian Civil 
Rights Act of 1968 (25 USCA 1302).
 
 

 ARTICLE XI - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this constitution may be proposed by a majority vote 
of the Tribal Council or by a petition signed by fifty (50) of the registered 
voters of the tribe and, if approved by the Secretary of the Interior 
shall be submitted to a vote of the adult members of the Tribe in 
an election conducted pursuant to regulations of the Secretary of the 
Interior. Such amendments shall be effective if ratified by a majority 
of those who cast ballots. Copies of any proposed amendment shall 
be furnished to members upon request. Notice of a proposed amendment 
shall be given to the voting population at least thirty (30) days prior to 
an election on such proposal through appropriate publicity.
 
 

 ARTICLE XII - RECALL AND REMOVAL

 
 Section 1. Recall and Removal Ordinance. The Tribal Council shall 
enact an ordinance outlining procedures for the conduct of a recall 
meeting of the membership pursuant to Section 2(a) of this article, 
for the conduct of a hearing by the Hearing Board as defined in Article 
IV of the Bylaws pursuant to Section 2(b) of this article, and for the 
conduct of a special Tribal Council Meeting pursuant to Section 3 of 
this article. These procedures must include an opportunity for the 
accused to confront his accusers and to speak on his behalf in answer 
to a written statement of charges which have been provided to him at 
least fifteen (15) days in advance of the recall meeting of the member
ship, the hearing of the Hearing Board, or the removal meeting of the 
Tribal Council.

The ordinance shall also contain the provision that any elected or 
appointed officer missing four (4) consecutive meetings of the body 
of which he is a member, without cause acceptable to that body shall 
forfeit his office.

Sec. 2. Recall. The recall of a member of the Tribal Council 
may be initiated by a tribal member either by petition or by presenta
tion of charges to the Hearing Board. Once an individual is subjected 
to recall proceedings, he shall not again be considered for such action 
until at least six (6) months have passed. 

(a)  Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least fifty 
(50) of the tribe's registered voters, it shall be the duty of 
the Chairman to call and conduct within fifteen (15) days, 
a special meeting of the membership to consider the recall 
of a member of the Tribal Council. Such meeting is subject 

to quorum provisions. Only one (1) member of the council 
shall be considered for recall at any given recall meeting.

(b)  Upon receipt of written charges of misconduct or 
violation of this constitution by a tribal member against 
any member of the Tribal Council, it shall be the duty of 
the Chairman of the Hearing Board to call and conduct a 
meeting of that body within fifteen (15) days to decide 
whether this proposal to recall one (1) or more tribal 
officials shall be denied or submitted to the Election 
Board which shall conduct a recall election in accordance 
with the provisions of the election ordinance.

Sec. 3. Removal. The Tribal Council shall be empowered to remove 
a member of that body from office in accordance with the criteria and 
procedures provided in the ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 1 of 
this article. Such action must be taken at a special tribal council 
meeting called for that purpose.
 
 

BYLAWS

ARTICLE I - OATH OF OFFICE

 
 Section 1. Each member of the Tribal Council shall take an oath of 
office and pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution and 
Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma prior to assuming the 
duties of his office.

The following form of oath shall be given:

I, ______ _, do hereby solemnly affirm
that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States against all enemies, and will carry out faithfully and 
impartially the duties of my office to the best of my ability 
and will promote and protect the best interest of the Caddo  
Indian Tribe in accordance with the tribal constitution and 
bylaws.

The oath of office is to be administered by the Chairman of the 
election board.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Place. All quarterly meetings of the membership of the 
Caddo Indian Tribe and all monthly meetings of the Tribal Council and 
any special meetings of either body shall be held at the Binger 
Community Building, Binger, Oklahoma, unless otherwise specified 
by the Tribal Council. Public notice at least ten (10) days prior to the 
meeting must be given for any change in the place of a meeting of the 
membership.

Sec. 2. Conduct. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with 
Robert's Rules of Order, unless otherwise specified in this Constitution 
and Bylaws.

Sec. 3. Quorum. Twenty (20) registered members, excluding Tribal 
Council members shall constitute a quorum to conduct business at the 
quarterly membership meetings or special meetings of the member
ship. A majority of the Tribal Council shall constitute a quorum to 
conduct any business at the monthly Tribal Council meetings.

Sec. 4. Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Tribal Council

HeinOnline was unable to locate the following content for digitization

Title: Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma

Vol(s): 1976

Missing: Pages 14

If your library is in possession of this material and is willing to donate and/or lend 
to use for digitization, please contact us by phone: 1-800-277-6995 or email: 
holsuDDort@wshein.com
 
 

HEINONLINE

ARTICLE IV  - HEARING BOARD

 
 Section 1. Composition. The Hearing Board shall be composed of five 
(5) members of the tribe. At the first meeting following each annual 
election the Hearing Board shall select from within its membership 
a Chairperson and a Recorder.

Sec. 2. Selection. The members of the Hearing Board shall be elected 
by secret ballot pursuant to Article VII in conjunction with the election 
of Tribal Council members.

Sec. 3. Terms of Office. The term of office of a member of the 
Hearing Board shall be for a period of two (2) years and until a 
successor is duly elected and installed except for the first election 
held under this constitution. At the first election, two (2) members of 
the Hearing Board shall be elected for terms of one (1) year and three 
(3) members of the Hearing Board shall be elected for terms of two 
(2) years. The Hearing Board members shall be eligible to serve 
three (3) consecutive terms. At the completion of the third (3rd) 
consecutive term, a Hearing Board member shall not be eligible for 
election or appointment to fill a vacancy on the Hearing Board until 
a period of two (2) years has elapsed. Members of the Hearing 
Board shall not be subject to removal or recall.

Sec. 4. Qualifications of Candidates. All members of the Caddo 
Indian Tribe who will have reached the age of thirty-five (35) years
by the date of the election shall be eligible to become candidates for 
election to membership on the Hearing Board, provided that no 
tribal member may serve at the same time as a member of the Hearing 
Board and as a member of either the Tribal Council or the Election 
Board.

Sec. 5. Filling of Vacancies. If a vacancy occurs on the Hearing 
Board, the Tribal Council shall appoint a successor to fill the vacancy, 
who shall be qualified according to Section 4 of this article, to serve 
until the next regular election.

Sec. 6. Duties. Action of the Hearing Board shall be initiated by 
a written statement of charges against one (1) or more members of the 
Tribal Council requesting that a recall election be conducted. The 
hearing shall be conducted pursuant to an ordinance enacted by the 
Tribal Council in accordance with Article XII of this constitution. 
All decisions of the Hearing Board as to whether or not the Election 
Board shall be instructed to conduct a recall election shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws shall be effective when approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the adult 
members of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma voting in an election 
called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior under rules 
and regulations which he may prescribe pursuant to Section 3 of the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat, 1967).
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved April 13 

, 1976, by the

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the

attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of 

Oklahoma, was submitted for ratification to the eligible voters of 

the Caddo Indian Tribe and was on June 26, 1976, duly 

ratified by a vote of 87 for, and 65 against, in

an election duly called for that purpose.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, (Sgd) Morris Thompson, Commissioner of Indian

Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the  

Interior by the Act of June 28, 1336 (49 Stat. 1967), as amended, and 

delegated to me by 230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma.

Washington, D.C.
Date: APR 13 1976

