 
  
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE  
 

CADDO INDIAN TRIBE OF 

OKLAHOMA

 
 RATIFIED JANUARY 17, 1938 
 

UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 
THE CADDO INDIAN TRIBE 
OF OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED JANUARY 17, 1938 
 

UNITED STATES 

 
 GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE.

WASHINGTON: 1988 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE CADDO INDIAN 
TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the Caddo Indians of the Kiowa Indian Agency Jurisdiction 
of Oklahoma, in order to promote our common welfare and to secure 
to ourselves and our descendants the rights, powers and privileges 
offered by the Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act (49 
Stat. 1967), approved June 26, 1936, do establish this organization 
and adopt the following constitution and by-laws pursuant to that 
Act.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the "Caddo Indian Tribe of 

Oklahoma."

Article II—Membership of Tribe

The membership of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall con

sist of the following persons:

Section 1. All persons of Caddo Indian blood who were enrolled, 
or were entitled to be enrolled on the official census roll of the Tribe 
as of January 1, 1937.

Sec. 2. All children born of a marriage and since the date of said 

roll, both of whose parents are members of said Tribe.

Sec. 3. Any child born of a marriage between a member of the 
Caddo Indian Tribe and a member of any other tribe who chooses to 
affiliate with the Caddo Indian Tribe.

Sec. 4. Any child born of a marriage between a member of the 
Caddo Indian Tribe and any other person, if such child is enrolled 
before attaining the age of five years. Where no such enrollment is 
made such child may be admitted by a majority vote of the Caddo 
Council.

Sec. 5. Any illegitimate child whose mother is a Caddo Indian.
Sec. 6. The Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regula
tions, subject to the review of the Secretary of the Interior, covering 
future membership, including adoption, expulsion, and loss of mem
bership.

Article III—Membership of Council

The supreme governing body of this organization shall be the Caddo 
Council. The membership of the Council shall be all the members of 
the Caddo Indian Tribe, 21 years of age and older, residing within 
the jurisdiction of the Kiowa Agency. All actions of the Council 
shall be determined by a majority vote of the membership present.

Article IV—Officers

The officers of the Tribe shall be the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, 
Secretary-Treasurer, and two Councilmen. The term of the officers 
shall be for four years, except as provided in sect ion 1 of Article VII.

Article V—Committees

Section 1. There shall be an Executive Committee which shall 
consist of the officers provided for in Article IV. This Committee 
shall have power to appoint subordinate committees and representa
tives, to transact business and otherwise speak or act on behalf of the 
Caddo Indian Tribe in all matters on which the said Indians are em
powered to act now or in the future. The powers of the Caddo Indian 
Tribe shall be set forth in detail in the corporate charter to be re
quested by the Executive Committee.

Sec. 2. There shall be a Grievance Committee which shall consist 
of three members who shall be elected by the Caddo Council and 
shall not include any members of the Executive Committee.

Sec. 3. All actions by the Executive and Grievance Committees 

shall be determined by a majority vote of the members present.

Article VI—Meetings

Section 1. Annual meetings of the Council shall be held on the 
first Tuesday in June for the purpose of receiving reports and trans
acting any other business which may come regularly before the 
Council.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Council may be called at the dis
cretion of the Chairman, and shall be called by him upon the written 
request of a majority of the Executive Committee or upon the written 
request of 50 members of the Council; Provided, That at least ten 
days’ notice shall be given in each instance.

Sec. 3. The principal object of a special Council meeting must be 
stated in the call for same and may include the words “and for the 
transaction of other business that may be presented.” Unless these 
words are added no other business may be transacted except for the 
object stated in the call.

Sec. 4. The regular meetings of the Executive Committee shall 
be held the first Tuesday in each month unless otherwise provided by 
resolution.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Executive Committee may be called 
by the Chairman at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon 
the written request of three members of the Executive Committee.

Article VII—Elections

Section 1. Within 60 days after the adoption of this Constitution 
and By-laws, the Council shall hold an election of members of the 
Executive and Grievance Committees, under rules and regulations 
prescribed by the present Business Committee of the Caddo Indian 
Tribe. The Executive and Grievance Committee members elected 
at this election shall serve till the next regular election provided for 

in section 2 of this Article or until their successors are elected and 
installed.

Sec. 2. Regular elections of officers and members of the Grievance 
Committee shall be held by the Council at its regular annual meeting 
on the first Tuesday in June, 1941, and on the first Tuesday in June 
of each fourth year thereafter.

Sec. 3. Election shall be by roll call, a majority vote being neces
sary to elect. Where there are more than two candidates for an 
office and no one receives a majority vote, the low candidate shall be 
eliminated and voting shall proceed until one candidate receives a 
majority of the votes cast. The newly elected officers shall be installed 
immediately upon their election; 

Seo. 4. To be eligible for election under section 1 of this Article, 
notice of candidacy shall be filed with the present Business Committee 
30 days prior to election. To be eligible for election under sec
tion 2 of this Article, notice of candidacy for an elective office must 
be filed with the, Secretary of the Council 30 days prior to election. 
Such notice shall; be valid if filed by a candidate himself or Upon 
the petition of 15 members of the Council. No person shall be a 
candidate for more than one office at any one election.

. 

.

Article VIII—Vacancies

 Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled for an unexpired 
term at any special or regular meeting of the Council.

Article IX—Removal of Officers

The Grievance Committee shall investigate complaints of miscon
duct in office of the members of the Executive Committee and upon 
proper showing shall call a special meeting of the Council to act on 
such complaints. The Council shall have power by a majority vote’, 
after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him from office and 
to proceed to elect a successor.

Article X—Bill of Rights

Section 1. All members of the Caddo Indian. Tribe shall enjoy 
without hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, 
assembly and association. 

Sec. 2. This Constitution shall pot in any way alter, abridge or 
otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of this 
Tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma, or the United States, 

Sec. 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Tribe 
shall not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions 
of this Constitution and By-laws without the consent of such indi
vidual member. .

Article XI—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and attached By-laws may he 
proposed by a majority vote of the Executive Committee or by a 
petition signed by 30 per cent of the adult members of the Tribe 
residing within the Kiowa jurisdiction, and if approved by the Secre

tary of the Interior, shall be submitted to a referendum vote of the 
adult members of the Tribe, and shall be effective if approved by a 
majority vote.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE CADDO INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman—-The Chairman shall preside at all meetings 
of the Council and of the Executive Committee. He shall have 
general supervision of the affairs of the Council and of the Executive 
Committee and shall perform all duties appertaining to the office 
of Chairman. 

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman.—In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice

Chairman shall perform the duties of that office.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer.—The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep 
an accurate account of all proceedings and official records of the 
Council and of the Executive Committee and shall file a copy of 
same with the Superintendent of the Kiowa Indian Agency. He 
shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all 
correspondence pertaining to the business of the Council and Execu
tive Committee. All official records of the Secretary shall be open to 
the inspection of the members of the Council, in the presence of the 
Secretary, upon the order of the Grievance Committee. He shall 
keep a correct list of all members of the Council, shall certify all 
accounts or orders of the Council and in the absence of the Chairman 
and Vice-Chairman shall call meetings to order until a chairman 
pro tem is selected.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in 
possession of the Council from any source. He shall keep an accurate 
record of all funds and shall disburse the same in accordance with 
the vote of the Executive Committee and shall file a copy with 
the Superintendent of the Kiowa Indian Agency. He shall Keep all 
tribal money entrusted to his care in a special account. At any time 
that such an account shall amount to $50.00 or more, he shall file a 
bond satisfactory to the Executive Committee and the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of tribal 
money. At the expiration of his term of office the records and all 
papers and funds in his possession shall be turned over to his 
successor.

Article II—Qualifications of Officers

Any person elected to membership on the Executive and Grievance 
Committees shall not be less than 21 years of age and a member of 
the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma. At the time of election he 
shall be an actual resident of the territory known as the Kiowa 
Indian Agency jurisdiction. Any person holding an elective office 
removing from this jurisdiction for a period of six months or failing 
to attend monthly meetings for four months in succession shall 
automatically lose office.
 
 

I

 
 Article III—Place of Meetings

Section 1. All regular and special meetings of the Council shall be 
held at Riverside School unless some other point under the Kiowa 
jurisdiction is designated in the call or notice.

Sec. 2. All regular and special meetings of the Executive Com
mittee shall be held in the Council Chamber, Federal Building, Ana
darko, Oklahoma, unless some other place is designated.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Ninety members of the Council shall constitute a quo

rum to transact business at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Three members of the Executive Committee shall constitute 

a quorum to transact any business.

Article V—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws, shall be effective when approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of 
the adult members of the Caddo Indian Tribe of Oklahoma voting at 
an election called by the Secretary of the Interior under rules and 
regulations which he may prescribe pursuant to section 3 of the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Caddo Indian Tribe of 
Oklahoma.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., November 15, 1937.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 15, 1937 by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Caddo Indian Tribe 
of Oklahoma and was on January 17, 1938 duly accepted by a vote of 
316 for, and 33 against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant to section 3 of the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

The Caddo Tribal Committee, 

By Maurice Bedoka.
Jesse Ahdunko. 
Stanley Edge.

W. B. MoCown,

Superintendent, Kiowa Indian Agency.

1
 
 

AMENDMENT TO THE BY-LAWS OF THE CADDO INDIAN 
TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Amendment I.

read as follows:

Article IV—Quorum. Section 1 of the By-laws shall be amended to 

“Sec. 1. Forty members of the Council shall constitute a quorum to 

transact business at any meeting.”
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved on July 20, 1943, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment to the By-laws of 
the Caddo Indian Tribe was submitted for ratification to the members 
of the Caddo Tribe of Oklahoma, and on September 14, 1943, was duly 
adopted by a vote of 87 for and 1 against, in an election in which over 
18 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance 
with Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 
(49 Stat. 1967).

Lloyd Tounwin, 
Chairman, Tribal Council.
Andrew Dunlap, 
Secretary, Tribal Council.

W. B. McCown,

Superintendent, Kiowa Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the above 
amendment to the Constitution and By-laws or the Caddo Indian 
Tribe of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended: November 17, 1943.
William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

[seal] 

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.

Washington, D. C., January 11, 1944.

