 
  
 ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
 

OF THE CAHTO TRIBE OF THE 

LAYTONVILLE RANCHERIA

PREAMBLE

 
 We the people of the Cahto Tribe of the Laytonville Rancheria, a federally recognized 

Indian Tribe, do hereby adopt this updated Articles of Association of the Laytonville Rancheria 

in order to: promote the common good and well-being of the Tribe; protect and 

preserve our culture and traditions including our language, arts and crafts, and archeological 

sites; protect our land, water and natural resources; promote and protect the health and welfare of 

our people; encourage and promote educational opportunities for members of the Tribe; foster 

economic development; protect the individual rights of our members; acquire additional lands for 

the benefit of the Tribe; promote self-government and ensure the political integrity of the Tribe: 

preserve, secure and exercise all the inherent sovereign rights and powers of an Indian tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Cahto Tribe of the Laytonville Rancheria, 

hereinafter referred to as "the Tribe".
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 A.  Territory. The territory of the Tribe shall include, consistent with federal law, all trust and fee 

lands, water, property, airspace, surface rights, subsurface rights, minerals, and other natural 

resources in which the Tribe now or in the future has any interest, for the exclusive or non

exclusive benefit of the Tribe or for individual tribal members.

B. Jurisdiction, except as prohibited by federal law. The Tribe shall have jurisdiction over all tribal 

members and over all persons, subjects, property and all activities occurring-within its territory as 

defined by this updated Articles of Association, nothing in this updated Articles of Association shall 

be construed to limit the ability of the Tribe to exercise its jurisdiction, based upon its inherent 

sovereignty as an Indian tribe. This updated Articles of Association replaces and updates the 

original Articles of Association of the Laytonville Rancheria, as previously adopted by the 

Tribe on February 12, 1967.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 A.  Membership of the Tribe shall consist of persons in the following categories whose 

eligibility for membership has been established in accordance with procedures set forth in an 

enrollment ordinance approved by the General Council.

1)  All living persons listed on the official census of the Laytonville Rancheria dated 

October 31, 1944.

2)  All living and direct, lineal descendants of persons listed on the official census of the 

Laytonville Rancheria dated October 31. 1944,.

3)  Persons shall be ineligible for membership if they have been affiliated with any other 

tribe, group or band to the extent of:

(a)  being included on a formal membership roll,

(b)  having received an allotment, provided the allotment was not inherited, 

or formal assignment of land, 

having been named as a distributee or dependent of a distributee in a 

rancheria distribution plan.,

B.  The membership roll shall be brought up to date annually in accordance with procedures 

established by an updated Enrollment Ordinance. The updated ordinance shall include provisions 

for appointing an enrollment committee, provisions for the processing of enrollment applications, 

and provisions for new member approval by a majority vote of General Council at a duly called 

meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 The governing body of the Tribe shall be the General Council, which shall consist of all adult 

members eighteen years of age or over. In addition, there shall be such other temporary or 

permanent committees as are deemed necessary by the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

 
 There shall be elected an Executive Committee consisting of a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, 

Secretary-Treasurer, and a Member-At-Large/Altemate who all shall hold office for three years. 

The Executive Committee succession shall be facilitated by staggered terms as provided in Article 

VI. In the instance of a vacancy in any office, succession shall be determined per the provisions of 

Article VII, with determination of rank order of office holding as shown per this Article V.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VOTING RIGHTS AND ELECTIONS

 
 Any member of the General Council eighteen (18) years of age or older shall have the right to vote.

Any General Council member twenty-five (25) years of age or older, and duly nominated and 

elected may hold office. Nominations for Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and Secretary-Treasurer, and 

Member-At-Large shall be made at a General Council meeting called for that purpose, and all age- 

qualified nominees, per provisions of this Article VI and as certified by the Election Committee 

shall have their names placed on the ballot Per the provisions of Article II this updated Articles 

of Association replaces the original Articles of Association of the Laytonville Rancheria, and 

does not impact the continuity of existing Tribal government. The existing Executive 

Committee, duly elected per the original Articles of Association of the Laytonville Rancheria, 

as updated by this Articles of Association, shall assume the initial terms of the Executive 

Committee. Staggered elections for subsequent terms, per Article V, shall be provided for as 

follow:

1)  Chairman - subsequent election on third anniversary of the date of adoption of this 

updated Articles of Association;

2)  Vice-Chairman - subsequent election on second anniversary of the date of adoption of this 

updated Articles of Association;

3)  Secretary-Treasurer - subsequent election on first anniversary of the date of adoption of 

this updated Articles of Association;

4)  Member-At-Large - subsequent election shall be in accordance with the provisions of 

Article VI and Article X.

All subsequent elections shall be conducted in accordance with an Election Ordinance adopted by 

the Executive Committee, which shall provide for the dates thereof, polling places, election 

committee and their duties, absentee balloting, and any other necessary requirements. All 

referendum elections pertaining to Executive Committee elections, and after the date of adoption of 

this updated Articles of Association, shall require a quorum of 51% of eligible voters per the 

provisions of this Article VI, and as in accordance with a revised Election Ordinance. If a quorum 

is not obtained for any given election, the existing office holder shall retain his/her position until 

which time a subsequent referendum election is organized by the Tribe. Eligible voters residing 

more than fifty (50) miles from the Laytonville Rancheria, or elders requiring special assistance, 

shall automatically be included for purposes of establishing a quorum, as per the revised Election 

Ordinance, and shall be provided the opportunity to vote by absentee ballot in all referendum 

elections. For purposes of establishing a quorum, an elder shall consist of any member over the 

age of fifty-five (55) or a member physically unable to attend the election polling site.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VACANCIES AND RECALL

 
 A.  Vacancies. If an elected official dies, resigns, is found guilty of a felony in any State or 

Federal Court while holding office, or is recalled per the provisions of Article VII(B), a vacancy in

the office shall be automatically created. Such vacancy shall be filled in accordance with the 

following provisions:

1)  Remaining Executive Committee elected officials shall temporarily oversee duties of the 

vacant official, in rank order of office holding listed per the provisions of Article V.

2)  The Executive Committee quorum shall remain at two out of three members required for 

quorum.

3)  Vacancy shall be filled by vote of General Council at a special meeting. The General 

Council special meeting shall be called within thirty (30) days of the vacancy occurrence.

B.  Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the eligible 

voters calling for the recall of an elected official for unsatisfactory performance, negligence of 

duties, or for misrepresentation of the Tribe, the Election Committee shall examine the petition, 

and if it is signed by the required number of eligible voters, the Committee shall recommend the 

Executive Committee call and convene a special General Council within thirty (30) days after 

receipt of the petition. The accused official shall be given a written statement of all charges filed 

against him/her at least ten (10) days before such meeting at which he/she is to appear and shall be 

given a fair opportunity to answer any and all written charges. Thereafter, at the same meeting, a 

recall election shall be held. A majority of those voting in such recall election shall govern, 

provided a majority of the eligible voters, or at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the Tribe, 

participate in such recall election. If the Executive Committee fails to call and convene a special 

General Council meeting within thirty (30) days. The individuals subject to recall shall be 

considered removed,
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - ENUMERATED POWERS

 
 The Executive Committee shall have the following powers:

(A)  Represent the Tribe in all negotiations with local. State, and Federal governments, their 

agencies and officers, and for the benefit of all members of the Tribe.

(B)  To represent the Tribe in all negotiations with Federal, State, State, and Tribal governments, 

private entities and individuals on behalf of the Tribe; to consult with the Department of the 

Interior on all activities of the Department which might affect the Cahto Indian Tribe; and to 

advise the Secretary of the Interior and other federal officials as required by law on all federal 

projects for the benefit of the Tribe; provided that all contract provisions and agreement 

terms, as negotiated by any given Executive Committee, shall survive and supersede the 

influence of future Executive Committee election changes in order to promote stability and 

continuity of Tribal business and economic development activities.

(C)  To promote the health, education and general welfare of the members of the Tribe and to 

administer charity and such other services as may contribute to the social and economic 

advancement of the Tribe and its members, through efficient tribal-wide business

management of tribal administrative and economic development affairs.

(D)  To encourage and foster arts, crafts, traditions and culture of the Tribe.

(E)  To promulgate and enforce resolutions and ordinances, including but not limited to 

ordinances for the levying of taxes and fees and the appropriation of available Tribal funds 

for public and other lawful purposes; providing for the licensing of businesses and other 

activities by any and all persons within Tribal territory, subject to the Tribe's jurisdiction; 

providing for the exclusion of persons from Tribal territory; and providing for effective self

governance procedures. To enact ordinances, consistent with this updated Articles of 

Association for the conduct of elections, and other necessary ordinances as needed.

(F)  To borrow money and provide for the repayment thereof facilitate future direct investments 

in tribal enterprises by external investors, manage all economic affairs and enterprises, create 

Tribally owned and/or chartered corporations or other business entities and employ and 

discharge Tribal Employees; provided that all contract provisions and agreement terms, as 

negotiated by any given Executive Committee, shall survive and supersede the influence of 

future Executive Committee election changes in order to promote stability and continuity of 

Tribal business and economic development activities.

(G)  To initiate, approve or reject any acquisition, disposition, lease, encumbrance or 

condemnation of Tribal lands or property; to pledge newly-purchased lands as security for 

loans on such lands; to manage, protect and preserve all lands, minerals, wildlife and other 

natural resources of the Tribe; and to initiate and administer land development projects for the 

Tribe on Tribal lands.

(H)  To create and maintain a reasonable fund for Tribal administrative expenses and to provide 

for renumeration for Executive Committee members and Tribal officials as may be required.

(I)  To administer any funds or property within the control of the Tribe for the benefit of 

the Tribe and its members, officers or employees.

(J)  To allocate Tribal funds as loans or grants and to transfer Tribal property and other assets to 

Cahto Indian Tribal organizations for such use as the Executive Committee may determine to 

be appropriate.

(K)  To choose and employ legal counsel and/or other consultants and representative and to fix 

fees for such counsel and/or other consultants and representative(s), in furtherance of the 

Tribe's interests, and subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his/her delegate 

as required by law.

(L)  To initiate such administrative proceedings and/or legal action on behalf of the Tribe as 

may be necessary to protect the interests of the Tribe and its members.

(M)  To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe; to provide for the guardianship 

of minors and incompetent persons within Tribal jurisdiction; to provide services for the 

health, education and welfare of all persons within Tribal jurisdiction.

(N)  To form or join Tribal courts/consortia/Indian organizations now existing or yet to be 

formed for the purpose of exercising the Tribes civil and criminal jurisdiction and protecting 

the rights and interests of the Tribe's members including, but not limited to, those rights and 

interests enumerated in the Indian Child Welfare Act

(O)  To create and regulate subordinate committees and organizations and to delegate powers to 

such committees or organizations, or to any subordinate boards or Tribal officials, consistent 

with this updated Articles of Association, reserving the right to review and rescind any action 

taken under such delegation.

(P)  To preserve, protect and uphold the updated Articles of Association of the Cahto Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - GENERAL POWERS 

 
 •

The Executive Committee shall have all of the appropriate powers necessary to implement specific 

provisions of this updated Articles of Association and to effectively govern the affairs of the Tribe. 

All other powers heretofore vested in the Tribe and not specifically referred to in this updated 

Articles of Association, including the waiver of the Tribe’s sovereign immunity to uncontested 

lawsuit, are reserved to the General Council, and may be exercised through initiative, referendum, 

recall or amendment to this updated Articles of Association.
 
 

ARTICLE X - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 A.  Chairman. He/she shall preside at all meetings of the General Council and Executive 

Committee, execute on behalf of the Tribe all contracts, leases, or other documents when 

authorized to do so by a majority vote of the Executive Committee, and certify to the enactment of 

all written resolutions and ordinances. He/she shall have the general supervision of all other 

officers, committees, and employees, and shall see that their duties are properly performed, subject 

to tribal operating policies. When neither the General Council nor the 

Executive Committee are in session, he/she shall be the official representative of the Tribe, for 

general purposes and subject to the restriction provisions of the Article X(A). The 

Chairman may vote in elections of officers and referendum elections, but he/she shall not vote 

when presiding at meetings, except to break a tie vote. He/she shall have joint signatory authority 

on all tribal financial transactions and serve as one of three check signers per fiscal operating 

policy.

B.  Vice-Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman he/she shall have the duties of the 

Chairman, and, when requested, shall assist the Chairman in the performance of his/her duties. 

He/she shall have joint signatory authority on all tribal financial transactions and serve as one of 
throe check signers per fiscal operating policy.

C. Secretary-Treasurer. He/she shall keep the minutes of the Tribal and General Council meetings. 

He/she shall attest to the enactment of all written resolutions and ordinances, attend to the giving 

of all notices required by these Articles, and receive on behalf of the Executive Committee all 

petitions provided for in these updated Articles of Association. He/she shall have the care and 

custody of all valuables of the Tribe, including Tribal funds under exclusive control of the Tribe as 

directed by the Executive Committee, and as supported by appropriate tribal administration and 

operating procedures and personnel. He/she shall work with tribal administrative personnel, at the 

request of the Executive Committee, to obtain reports on all receipts and expenditures and the 

amount and nature of all funds in Tribal custody, with such management information to be reported 

to the Executive Committee at regular meetings and at such other times as requested. He/she shall 

have joint signatory authority on all tribal financial transactions and serve as one of three check 

signers per fiscal operating policy. Vouchers shall be approved for payment by two of the three 

sitting Executive Committee members, with no disbursement of funds in the custody of the 

Executive Committee except when properly authorized to do so by the Executive Committee 

representing a quorum and in accordance with a written procedure approved and adopted by the 

Executive Committee by resolution.

D.  Member-At-Large. He/she shall participate in all Executive Committee meetings and to carry 

out duties and responsibilities as assigned by the Chairman, provided only that any one of the other 

three Executive Committee members shall not be able to attend any given meeting. The Member- 

At-Large shall not have voting power except in the case of succession of vacancy per the 

provisions of Article VII. The initial Member-At-Large shall be duly elected within one hundred- 

twenty days (120) of the certification of this updated Articles of Association by the Bureau of 

Indian Affairs Central California Agency.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - MEETINGS

 
 A. The General Council shall regularly convene two times yearly during the months of January and 

July, at times to be prescribed by the Executive Committee. General Council meetings will be held 

at the Cahto Cultural Center unless alternative arrangements are communicated to Tribal members 

per provisions of Article XI.

B.  The Executive Committee may call special meetings of the General Council as it sees fit, but is 

required to call special meetings promptly upon receipt of petitions signed by at least thirty percent 

(30%) of the eligible voters requesting a meeting. A majority, or fifty-one percent (51%), of the 

eligible voters of the Tribe, are required to vote on any action resulting from a petition action.

C.  One regular meeting of the Executive Committee shall be held prior to each regular meeting 

of the General Council to set the date and to prepare the agenda for the General Council meeting. 

Special Executive Committee meetings may he called by the Chairman or the Secretary when

deemed necessary. Two members of the Executive Committee shall constitute a quorum for the 

conduct of business.

D.  Notice of meetings and agenda items. In order to provide a venue for involvement by all 

members of General Council, the following times and procedures shall apply:

1)  Executive Committee meeting and agenda shall be provided in writing to all eligible 

voters at least ten (10) days in advance of planned General Council meetings.

2)  During any scheduled Executive Committee meeting, attending General Council members 

shall have the right to request additional items be considered for the agenda. The 

Executive Committee Chairman shall decide on the merits of additionally requested items.

3)  Within thirty (30) days of certification of this updated Articles of Association, the 

Executive Committee shall enact an ordinance establishing any further rules of procedure 

required for properly conducting Executive Committee meetings.

E.  For purpose of establishing a quorum at any General Council meeting, the following procedures 

shall apply shall apply:

1)  No member shall attend a General Council meeting without signing the attendance sheet.

2)  At which time the Chairman, or designated individual presiding over a meeting, 

determines and announces a quorum, said quorum will be official, with the attendance 

sheet entered into the permanent Tribal records.

3)  Any member subsequently leaving the premises during the meeting, will remain in the 

quorum count.

4)  Any votes occurring during a meeting will take into consideration a majority of members 

physically present at the time of the vote.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - APPROVAL

 
 This updated Articles of Association shall become effective upon approval of the Secretary of the 

Interior or his/her designated representative.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This updated Articles of Association may be amended by a majority vote of the eligible voters of 

the Tribe, provided at least fifty-one percent (51%.) of eligible voters participate in a Secretarial 

election called for that purpose and such amendment shall be in effect upon the approval of the 

Secretary of the Interior or his/her designated representative. Amendments may be initiated by the 

Executive Committee, or a petition signed by at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the eligible voters 

of the Tribe. A secretarial election to amend the updated Articles of Association shall not be held 

unless the proposed amendment first has been explained at a duly called and convened General 

Council meeting. Any such election shall require a quorum of eligible voters per the provisions of 

Article VI of this updated Articles of Association.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 The undersigned certify that the foregoing updated Articles of Association was adopted at a 

referendum election held January 28, 2006. Per the updated Articles of Association of the 

Laytonville Rancheria, Articles V and IX, said election was participated in by a majority of 

eligible voters of Cahto Tribe of the Laytonville Rancheria. This updated Articles of Association 

hereby replaces the original Articles of Association of the Laytonville Rancheria. This 

certification, representing a General Council resolution in favor of adopting the foregoing and 

updated Articles of Association, was approved by a vote of  22  for,  9  against, and

 0  abstained, as witnessed by the existing Executive Committee leadership, per signatures 

affixed below, as witnessed by representative of the Bureau of Indian Affairs Central California 

Agency, and as witnessed by participating eligible voters per the attached signatory sheet. Cahto 

Tribe of the Laytonville Rancheria hereby requests official certification of the results of this 

referendum election by the Bureau of Indian Affairs Central California Agency.

Date  1/28/06 

Date  1-28-06 

Date  1/28/06

Date_________________
 
  
  
 

 
 
 United States Department of the Interior 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 Pacific Regional Office
2800 Cottage Way 
Sacramento. California 95825

Troy Burdick, Superintendent 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Central California Agency 
650 Capitol Mall, Suite 8-500 
Sacramento, CA 95814

Dear Mr. Burdick:

We have reviewed the formal results of the referendum election held on January 28, 2006 
involving the Cahto Tribe of the Laytonville Rancheria. The election was conducted in 
accordance with Article XI-Amendments, which states, in part, “these Articles of Association 
may be amended by a majority vote of the eligible voters of the Tribe, provided at least fifty-one 
percent (51%) of eligible voters participate in a referendum election called for that purpose and 
such amendment shall be in effect upon approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.”

As evidenced by the Certification, signed by the Tribe’s Executive Committee, the updated 
Articles of Association, by a vote of 22 “for” and 9 “against”, was duly adopted by the qualified 
voters of the Tribe. Therefore, by my signature on the enclosed Certificate of Approval, the 
updated Articles of Association is approved pursuant to the authority redelegated to me by 
Memorandum of Agreement dated August 16, 1994.

By separate cover letter, please notify and return to the Tribe the following documents; the 
original of this approval letter, the original Certificate of Approval, the Voter Sign-in Sheets, the 
voter ballots and copies of any other documents that would be appropriate for the Tribe to retain 
that relate to this referendum election process.

If you have any questions, please contact Fred Doka Jr.. Regional Tribal Operations Officer, at 
(916) 978-6067.

Sincerely,

Enclosures

cc: Director, Bureau Indian Affairs
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 The Articles of Association of the Cahto Tribe of the Laytonville Rancheria, which was adopted 
by the General Council of the Tribe on January 28, 2006 at a referendum election by a vote of 22 
for, 9 against, and 0 abstained, is hereby approved pursuant to the authority delegated to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended and delegated to 
the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 230 D.M. 2.4 and redelegated to me by 
Memorandum of Agreement dated August 16, 1994.

