HeinOnline

Citation:
George Emory Fay, Compiler %26 Editor. Charters,
Constitutions and By-Laws of the Indian Tribes of North
America (1967-1981 All Published).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Thu Jun 28 10:26:13 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device
 
 

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF THE LAYTONVILLE RANCHERIA

 
 [CAHTO INDIAN TRIBE]

Approved July 21, 1967
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Indian of the Laytonville Rancheria, in order to establish a formal organ
ization and to promote our common welfare, do hereby adopt the following Articles of 
Association.

ARTICLE I — NAME

The name of this organization shall be the Cahto Indian Tribe of Laytonville 

Rancheria, hereinafter referred to as "the Tribe”.

ARTICLE II — TERRITORY

The Jurisdiction of the Tribe shall extend to the land now and hereafter comprised 

within the Laytonville Rancheria.

ARTICLE III — MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1. Membership of the Tribe shall consist of persons in the following 
categories whose eligibility for membership has been established in accordance with 
procedures set forth in an enrollment ordinance approved by the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs:

(a) .All living persons listed on the official census of the Laytonville Rancheria 

as of October 31, 1944.

(b) .All living descendants of persons listed on the official census of the Lay

tonville Rancheria as of October 31, 1944, provided such descendants possess 
at least one-fourth (1/4) degree California Indian blood.

(c) .Persons who meet the requirements of Article III Section 1.(a) and Article 
III Section l.(b), shall be ineligible for membership if they have been af
filiated with any other tribe, group or band to the extent of (1) being in
cluded on a formal membership roll, (2) having received an allotment or 
formal assignment of land, (3) having been named as a distributee or depen
dent of a distributee in a reservation distribution plan.

SEC. 2. The membership roll shall be brought up to date annually in accordance 

with procedures established by an enrollment ordinance approved by the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs.

ARTICLE IV — GOVERNING BODY

The governing body of the Tribe shall be the General Council which shall consist 

of all adult members twenty one years of age or over. In addition, there shall be 
elected an Executive Committee consisting of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary-

Treasurer, who shall hold office for one year, or until their successors are duly 
elected and installed, and such other temporary or permanent committees as are 
deemed necessary by the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VOTING RIGHTS AND ELECTIONS

 
 Any member of the General Council shall have the right to vote, and, if duly 
nominated and elected, may hold office. All elections of officers and referendum 
elections shall be by secret ballot,

Nominations for Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary-Treasurer shall be made at 

a General Council meeting called for that purpose, and all nominees certified as 
voters by the Executive Committee shall have their names placed on the ballot, Fol
lowing the initial election of an Executive Committee as provided in Article X, all 
subsequent elections shall be conducted in accordance with resolutions or ordinances 
adopted by the General Council, which shall provide for the dates thereof, polling 
places, election committees and their duties, absentee balloting, and any other nec
essary requirements. To be officially recognized, all elections must be participated 
in by a majority of the eligible voters of the Tribe.

ARTICLE VI — VACANCIES AND RECALL

If an officer be found guilty of a felony in any State or Federal Court, a vacan

cy in the office shall be automatically created. If an officer shall die, resign, 
be found guilty of a felony or be recalled from office, the vacancy so created shall 
be filled by the General Council at its next meeting, and the replacement shall 
serve out the unexpired term of office of his predecessor, Upon receipt of a peti
tion signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters calling for the 
recall of an officer for unsatisfactory performance of duties, or for unsatisfactory 
representation of the Tribe, the Executive Committee shall examine the petition, and 
if it is signed by the required number of eligible voters, the Committee shall call 
and convene a general meeting within thirty (30) days after receipt of the petition, 
The accused official shall be given a written statement of all charges filed against 
him at least ten (10) days before such meeting at which he is to appear and shall be 
given a fair opportunity to answer any and all written charges. Thereafter, at the 
same meeting, a recall election shall be held, A majority of those voting in such 
recall election shall govern, provided a majority of the eligible voters of the 
Tribe participate in such recall election,

ARTICLE VII — POWERS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL AND EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

SECTION 1. General Council. Subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes 
of the United States or the State of California, the General Council shall have the 
following powers, but their enumerations shall not be considered as depriving the 
Tribe of any heretofore vested rights or powers, which may be exercised through ap
propriate amendments, ordinances or resolutions:

(a) .To manage, lease, contract, or otherwise deal with tribally-owned assets,

(b)  .To negotiate and execute attorney contracts, subject to approval of the Sec

retary of the Interior, or his authorized representative.

(c) .To establish fees, receive funds, and expend any funds which may come into 

the exclusive control of the Tribe for the payment of expenses of the Tribe 
or to finance any project which, in its opinion, is for the benefit of the 
Tribe as a whole.

(d).To enact ordinances, consistent with these Articles of Association and Fed
eral Law governing future membership, loss of membership, adoption of mem
bers by the Tribe, use of Rancheria land, conduct of election, and other 
necessary ordinances.

(e) .To establish its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its affairs, and 

by ordinance or resolution delegate to the Executive Committee, or other 
representatives, any of the foregoing powers.

(f) .To take such actions as are necessary to carry into effect any of the fore

going powers.

SEC. 2. Executive Committee. The Executive Committee shall have the following 

powers, but shall not commit the Tribe to any contract, lease, or other arrangement 
unless it is so authorized in advance by a duly enacted ordinance or resolution of 
the General Council:

(a) .Cause the effectuation of all ordinances, resolutions, or other enactments 

of the General Council.

(b) .Represent the Tribe in all negotiations with local, State, and Federal 

governments, their agencies and officers, and faithfully advise the General 
Council of all such aforementioned negotiations.

ARTICLE VIII — DUTIES OF OFFICERS

SECTION 1. Chairman. He shall preside at all meetings of the General Council 
and Executive Committee, execute on behalf of the Tribe all contracts, leases, or 
other documents when authorized to do so by the General Council, and certify to the 
enactment of all written resolutions and ordinances. He shall have the general su
pervision of all other officers, committees, and employees, and shall see that their 
duties are properly performed. When neither the General Council nor the Executive 
Committee are in session, he shall be the official representative of the Tribe. The 
Chairman may vote in elections of officers and referendum elections, but he shall 
not vote when presiding at meetings, except to break a tie vote.

SEC. 2. Vice-Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman he shall have the duties 

of the Chairman, and, when requested, shall assist the Chairman in the performance 
of his duties,

SEC. 3. Secretary-Treasurer. He shall keep the minutes of the General Council 

meetings, and a record of the Executive Committee meetings, He shall attest to the 
enactment of all written resolutions and ordinances, attend to the giving of all 
notices required by these Articles, and receive on behalf of the Executive Committee 
all petitions provided for in these Articles, He shall have the care and custody of 
all valuables of the Tribe, and deposit all funds in a depository which has been ap
proved by the General Council, He shall disburse all funds as authorized by resolu
tion of the General Council by checks which are cosigned by the Chairman, and shall 

maintain financial accounts, receipts and records which shall be made available for 
inspection by members of the General Council and representatives of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs at such times and places arranged by the Executive Committee. The 
financial records of the Tribe shall be audited at least once during each year in 
which sufficient funds are on deposit in the approved depository to warrant the ex
pense of an audit, as decided by the General Council. Each year, prior to the ex
piration of his term of office, he shall prepare a written report of receipts and 
expenditures and fund balance, and present same to the General Council, which shall 
appoint a committee to review the report and verify the figures from the financial 
records, and to report their findings to the General Council. The procedure of ap
pointing an inspection committee need not be followed in the years when a regular 
audit is obtained. Whenever the General Council deems it necessary, the Secretary
Treasurer shall be bonded to the Tribe, with bond premiums payable from tribal funds. 
Copies of all minutes, ordinances, and written resolutions of the General Council 
shall be sent to the Area Director as soon as possible after their approval.

ARTICLE IX — MEETINGS

SECTION 1. The General Council shall regularly convene three times annually 

during the months of March, August, and November at times and places to be prescribed 
by the Executive Committee. The Executive Committee may call special meetings of 
the General Council as it sees fit, but is required to call special meetings promptly 
upon receipt of petitions signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible 
voters requesting a meeting. A General Council meeting shall not be valid unless 
there is a majority of eligible voters present, and no business shall be conducted 
in the absence of such quorum. Notice of all General Council meetings shall be 
given in writing to the eligible voters at least ten (10) days in advance of the 
meetings,

SEC. 2. One regular meeting of the Executive Committee shall be held prior to 

each of the regular meetings of the General Council to set the date and to prepare 
the agenda for the General Council meeting. Special meetings of the Executive Com
mittee may be called by the Chairman or the Secretary-Treasurer when deemed neces
sary, Two members of the Executive Committee shall constitute a quorum for the con
duct of business,

ARTICLE X — APPROVAL

These Articles of Association shall be effective upon approval of the Commission

er of Indian Affairs, Within thirty (30) days after the document has been approved, 
the incumbent officers of the Tribe shall cause the election of an Executive Com
mittee pursuant to Article IV and V of these Articles of Association,

ARTICLE XI — AMENDMENTS

These Articles of Association may be amended by a majority vote of the eligible 

voters of the Tribe, provided at least fifty-one percent (51%) of eligible voters 
participate in a referendum election called for that purpose and such amendment 
shall be in effect upon the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Amend
ments may be initiated by the Executive Committee, or a petition signed by at least 
thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters of the Tribe. A referendum election to 
amend the Articles of Association shall not be held unless the proposed amendment 
first has been explained at a duly-called and convened General Council meeting.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 The undersigned certifies that the foregoing Articles of Association were adopted 

at a referendum election held February 12, 1967, which election was participated in 
by a majority of the adult Indians of the Laytonville Rancheria, resulting in a vote 
of 11 for, and 0 against.
 
 

CHRISTINE SMITH,

 
 Chairman, Laytonville Indian Rancheria

Attest: RICHARD T. SMITH 
Secretary, Laytonville Indian Rancheria
 
 

RECOMMENDED FOR APPROVAL

 
 LEONARD M. HILL 
Area Director

Date: March 6, 1967.

Approved:

(Sgd.) ROBERT L. BENNETT 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs

July 21, 1967

