 
 UNITED STATES  
 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF

THE CATAWBA INDIAN TRIBE

OF SOUTH CAROLINA


 
  
  
 APPROVED JUNE 30, 1944 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1946 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE CATAWBA INDIAN 
TRIBE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

PREAMBLE


We. the members of the Catawba Indian Tribe of South Carolina, 
in order to set up a more effective tribal organization, to improve our 
social and economic welfare, and to secure to ourselves and our poster
ity the benefits of organization, do hereby establish and ordain this 
constitution and by-laws for the Catawba Indian Tribe.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Catawba Tribe shall extend to the land within 
the boundaries of the present Indian reservation in South Carolina, 
and to such other lands as may hereafter be acquired for the mutual 
benefit of its members.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Catawba Tribe of South Caro

lina shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the tribal 

roll of July 1, 1943. as recognized by the State of South Carolina.

(b) All children born to any member of the Catawba Tribe, who 
is a resident of the State of South Carolina at the time of the birth of 
said children.

Section 2. The General Tribal Council, hereinafter provided for. 
shall have the power to pass ordinances, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, covering future membership and the adop
tion of new members.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Catawba Tribe of South 
Carolina shall be the General Tribal Council which shall be composed 
of all qualified voters of the Catawba Tribe.

Section 2. All enrolled members of the Catawba Tribe, male and 
female, who are 21 years of age or over shall be qualified voters at any 
tribal election.

Section 3. The General Tribal Council, by secret ballot, shall elect 
from its own members (a) a Chief, (b) an Assistant Chief, (c) a 
Secretary-Treasurer, and (d) two Trustees who shall, ex officio, serve 
as the Executive Committee of the Tribe, as provided in Section 5 of 
this Article and Section 3, Article I of the bylaws.

Section 4. The General Tribal Council shall meet on the first Sat
urday of January and July of each year. Within 30 days after the 
ratification and approval of this constitution and bylaws, a General 
Tribal Council of the Tribe shall be called by the present Chief for 
the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it shall transact

such other business as may be necessary. The officers elected at this 
meeting shall thereupon take office and serve until the July 1946 meet
ing, at which time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, offi
cials shall be chosen at the July meeting of every even year. The 
Chief, or 25 per cent of the qualified voters of the Tribe, by written 
notice may call special meetings of the General Tribal Council. 
Thirty-five qualified voters of the Tribe shall constitute a quorum at 
any special or regular meeting.

Section 5. There shall be an Executive Committee consisting of the 
Chief, Assistant Chief, Secretary-Treasurer, and the two Trustees pro
vided for in Section 3 of this Article, which Committee shall perform 
such duties as may from time to time be conferred on it by the General 
Tribal Council.

Article IV—Powers of the General Tribal Council

Section 1. The General Tribal Council of the Catawba Tribe shall 
exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by 
this constitution and by the statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments;
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;
(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets of the Tribe:

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Tribe prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 
Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To pass and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, providing for the super
vision and management of tribal lands including provisions for as
signments of tribal lands to the members;

(f)  To protect and preserve the property, wildlife, and natural 

resources of the Tribe;

(g)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedures of the Tribal 

Council itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials;

(A) To regulate the use and disposition of tribal property and 

funds.

Section 2. The General Tribal Council may exercise such further 
powers as may hereafter be delegated to it by the Secretary of the 
Interior, by any duly authorized official or agency of the State or 
Federal government, or by members of the Tribe.

Section 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Catawba Tribe of South Carolina, but not expressly 
referred to in this constitution, shall not be abridged by this Article, 
but may be exercised by the people of the Tribe through the adoption 
of appropriate bylaws and constitutional amendments.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal

Section 1. In case of a vacancy of any office caused by death, resig
nation, permanent removal from the State, or expulsion from office, 

such vacancy shall be filled at the next general council meeting of 
the Tribe.

Section 2. In case of misconduct, immorality, or neglect of duty 
by any tribal officer. 35 members of the Tribe may. by written petition, 
prefer charges against any such official at a regular or special meet
ing of the General Tribal Council. The accused shall be notified in 
advance of such meeting of the charges and shall have an opportunity 
to defend himself at such meeting. A two-thirds (2/3) vote of 
those present shall be necessary to remove an official from office.
 
 

ARTICLE VI----AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments of this constitution and bylaws may be proposed by 
a majority vote of the Catawba General Tribal Council and may be 
ratified and approved in the same manner as this constitution and 
by-laws.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE CATAWBA INDIAN TRIBE OF SOUTH CAROLINA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The duties of officers of the General Tribal Council shall 

be as follows:

(a)  The Chief of the Tribe shall preside at all meetings of the Gen
eral Tribal Council. He shall also be the presiding officer at any public 
meeting which may be duly called in accordance with this constitution. 
He shall at all times have general supervision of the affairs of the 
Tribal Council and Executive Committee and such matters as natu
rally pertain to the general welfare of the community. It shall also 
be the duty of the Chief to countersign all checks drawn against any 
funds of the organization by the Treasurer.

(b)  The Assistant Chief in the absence of the Chief shall preside at 
all meetings of the General Tribal Council and shall act in his stead 
in all matters pertaining to the office of Chief.

(c)  The Secretary-Treasurer of the General Tribal Council shall 
conduct all the tribal correspondence and shall keep an accurate record 
of all matters transacted at General Tribal Council meetings and Exec
utive Committee meetings. It shall be his duty to send promptly to 
the Superintendent of the jurisdiction and the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs copies of all minutes of regular and special meetings of the 
General Tribal Council and the Executive Committee.

He shall accept, receive, receipt for. preserve and safeguard all 
tribal funds or special funds for which the Council is acting as trustee 
or custodian. He shall deposit all funds in such depository as the 
Council shall direct and shall make and preserve a faithful record of 
such funds, and shall record all receipts and expenditures and the 
amount and nature of all funds in his possession and custody at each 
regular meeting of the General Council. An audit of accounts shall 
be made once a year and at such times as the General Tribal Council 
or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs may require. He shall not 
pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his possession or custody 
except in accordance with a resolution duly passed by the General 
Tribal Council. He shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to

the General Tribal Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
whenever in the opinion of the General Tribal Council or the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs sufficient funds have accumulated in the 
tribal treasury to justify the need for such bond.

Section 2. The duties of all officials of the General Tribal Council 
and the Executive Committee shall be clearly set forth by resolution 
of the General Tribal Council at the time of their creation and appoint
ment. Such officers and committees shall report to the General Tribal 
Council from time to time as required.

Section 3. The Executive Committee.—It shall be the duty of the 
Executive Committee, established pursuant to Section 3, Article III 
of this constitution, to act on behalf of the General Tribal Council 
at such times as said Council is not in session and to have charge of all 
routine matters which shall arise during such recess, including the 
administration of ordinances concerning lands under this constitution 
and such other matters as may be delegated to it by the General Tribal 
Council. It shall designate the time and place of its meetings and it 
shall determine the rules of its proceedings and keep a journal thereof, 
which shall be open to members of the Tribe at all reasonable hours. 
The Executive Committee shall make a report at each regular and 
special session of the Council.

Article II—Adoption

This constitution and by-laws, when adopted by a majority vote of 
the voters of the Catawba Tribe of South Carolina, voting at a special 
election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 30% 
of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary 
of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in force from the date 
of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved April 13, 1944, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Catawba Indian Tribe 
of South Carolina and was on May 20. 1944. duly ratified by a vote of 
54 for and 0 against, in an election in which at least 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with Section 16 
of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18. 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Albert Sanders. 
Rot Brown. 
Nelson Blue.

C. M. Blair,

Superintendent Cherokee Indian Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and by-laws of the Catawba Indian Tribe of 
South Carolina.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 

incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to the members of the 
Catawba Indian Tribe of South Carolina.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered to 

abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended:

William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., June 30, 1944.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.

