DATE DOWNLOADED: Wed Apr 13 16:19:54 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma (1976).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma (1976).

APA 7th ed.
(1976) 

. Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma (S.I.: s.n., 1976)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma (s.n., 1976

MLA 9th ed.
Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.


CONSTITUTION

CHEROKEE NATION

OKLAHOMA

CONSTITUTION OF THE CHEROKEE NATION

OF OKLAHOMA 

PREAMBLE 


We, the people of the Cherokee Nation, in order to preserve and enrich our tribal culture, achieve and 
maintain a desirable measure of prosperity, insure tranquility and to secure to ourselves and our posterity the 
blessings of freedom, acknowledging with humility and gratitude, the goodness of the Sovereign Ruler of the 
Universe in permitting us so to do, and imploring his aid and guidance in its accomplishment - do ordain and es
tablish this Constitution for the government of the Cherokee Nation. The term "Nation” as used in this Constitu
tion is the same as “Tribe”.
 
 

ARTICLE I

FEDERAL REGULATIONS 

 
 The Cherokee Nation is an inseparable part of the Federal Union. The Constitution of the United States is 
the Supreme law of the land; therefore, the Cherokee Nation shall never enact any law which is in conflict with 
any Federal law. 
 
 

ARTICLE II 

BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1. The judicial process of the Cherokee Nation shall be open to every member of the Cherokee 
Nation. Speedy and certain remedy shall be afforded under the terms of this Constitution for every wrong and 
injury to person, property or reputation wherein said remedy does not conflict with the laws of the United States.
the Council shall prescribe the procedures pertinent thereto. The appropriate protections guaranteed by the 

Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 shall apply to all members of the Cherokee Nation.
 
 

ARTICLE III

MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. All members of the Cherokee Nation must be citizens as proven by reference to the Dawes 
Commission Rolls, including the Delaware Cherokees of Article II of the Delaware Agreement dated the 8th day 
of May, 1867, and the Shawnee Cherokees as of Article III of the Shawnee Agreement dated the 9th day of June, 
1869, and/or their descendants. 

SECTION 2. There shall be established a Cherokee Register, to be kept by the Registrar, for the inclusion 
of any Cherokee for membership purposes in the Cherokee Nation who presents the necessary evidence of 
eligibility for registration. 

(a)  A Registration Committee shall be established. It shall be the duty of the Registration Committee to 
consider the qualifications and to determine the eligibility of those applying to have their names entered 
in the Cherokee Register. The Registration Committee shall consist of a Registrar and two (2) assist
ants. All members shall be appointed by the Principal Chief and confirmed by the Council.

(b)  There shall be a number assigned to every name which is approved and entered into the Cherokee Reg

ister. This number shall be preceded by the three words, “Cherokee Registry Number”.

(c)  The decisions of the Registration Committee shall be subject to review by the Tribunal created by 

Article VII.
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 SECTION 3. Registration as used in this article refers to the process of enrolling as a member of the Cher

okee Nation and is not the same as the registration for voting purposes.
 
 

 ARTICLE IV 

DISTRIBUTION OF POWERS 

 
 The powers of the government of the Cherokee Nation shall be divided into three (3) separate departments: 
Legislative, Executive and Judicial; and except as provided in this Constitution, the Legislative, Executive and 
Judicial departments of government shall be separate and distinct and neither shall exercise the powers properly 
belonging to either of the others.
 
 

 ARTICLE V 

LEGISLATIVE

 
 SECTION 1. The legislature shall consist of one legislative body to be called the Council of the Cherokee 
Nation. The initial election of the members to the Council pursuant to this constitution shall occur within 120 
days from the date of its ratification on a day to be announced by the Principal Chief.

SECTION 2. The Council shall establish its rules for its credentials, decorum and procedure.

SECTION 3. The Council shall consist of 15 members, who are members by blood of the Cherokee Nation 

of Oklahoma, and shall be elected at large.

The term of office of each Council member serving on the first Council shall run until the first Saturday in 
August of 1979 and until his successor is duly elected and installed. Thereafter, the term of office of each Coun
cil member shall be for four (4) years and until his successor is duly elected and installed.

SECTION 4. There shall be at least one regular session of the Council in the calendar year which shall con
vene on the second Monday in each January or at such other date as the Council shall determine. No business 
shall be conducted by the Council unless at least two-thirds (2/3) of the members thereof regularly elected and 
qualified shall be in attendance, which number shall constitute a quorum. The session may not exceed a maxi
mum of thirty (30) calendar days for pay purposes.

SECTION 5. Special meetings of the Council may be called: (A) by the Principal Chief, (B) by the Deputy 
Principal Chief when he has the full powers of the Principal Chief as elsewhere defined, (C) upon written request 
of fifty-one per cent (51%) of the members of the Council, or (D) upon the written request of ten per cent (10%) 
of the registered voters of the Cherokee Nation. The purposes of said meeting shall be stated in a notice publish
ed not less than ten (10) days prior to the meeting, and the Council may not consider any other subject not with
in such purposes. No special meetings may convene until (30) days have elapsed after the adjournment of a prior 
session or meeting, unless called pursuant to (A) and (B) above.

SECTION 6. All meetings of the Council and of its committees shall be open to the public except: (A) When 
the discussion shall concern employment, retention or discharge of personnel; (B) When the question of the 
moral turpitude of any member of the Tribe is discussed; or (C) When the decorum of the audience shall 
prejudice orderly administration of business. In the event that consideration of a subject shall take place in Exec
utive Session, the vote shall take place in an open meeting.

SECTION 7. The Council shall have the power to establish laws which it shall deem necessary and proper 
for the good of the Nation, which shall not be contrary to the provisions of this Constitution. Laws or enactments 
which are required by Federal statutes to be approved shall be transmitted immediately upon enactment as pro
vided by Section 11 of this Article to the President of the United States or his authorized representative.

The style of all bills or laws shall be: “Be It Enacted By The Cherokee Nation”. The style of all resolutions 

shall be “Be It Resolved By The Cherokee Nation”.
 
 

 
 
 
 
 SECTION 8. No laws passed by the Council shall have retroactive effect or operation.

SECTION 9. The Council shall have the power of removal and said removal must be conducted in accord
ance with Article XI of this Constitution. Nothing herein is intended to abrogate or limit the authority of the 
President of the United States, or any person or agency to which the President or Congress of the United States 
shall delegate authority therefore, to remove the Principal Chief or his subordinates. 

SECTION 10. Members of the Council and all Executive Officers shall be bound by oath, provided in 
Article XIII, to support the Constitution of the Cherokee Nation, the Constitution of the United States of Amer
ica, do everything within the individual’s power to promote the culture, heritage and traditions of the Cherokee 
Nation and to perform the duties of their respective offices with fidelity.

SECTION 11. Every enactment which shall have been approved by a majority of the members in attendance 
at the Council shall, before it becomes effective be presented to the. Principal Chief, if he approves, he shall sign 
it; if not, he shall return it with his objections to the Council, which shall enter the objections in the Journal and 
proceed to reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of the entire council shall agree to pass 
the enactment, it shall become fully effective and operational notwithstanding the objections of veto of the Prin
cipal Chief. In all such cases, the vote of the Council shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the 
members voting shall be entered on the Council’s Journal. If any enactment shall not be returned by the Prin
cipal Chief within five (5) days (Sundays and holidays excepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the 
same shall be law in like manner as if he had signed it, unless the Council shall, by its adjournment, prevent its 
return, in which case, it shall not become a law without the approval of the Principal Chief. No enactment shall 
become a law after the final adjournment of the Council, unless approved by the Principal Chief within fifteen 
(15) days after such adjournment.
 
 

ARTICLE VI

EXECUTIVE

 
 SECTION 1. The executive power shall be vested in a Principal Chief, who shall be styled “The Principal 
Chief of the Cherokee Nation”. The Principal Chief shall hold his office for the term of four (4) years; and shall 
be elected by the qualified voters on the same day and in the same manner, except as otherwise provided by this 
Constitution, as they shall respectively vote for members of the Council for that particular year, provided, the 
Principal Chief in office when this Constitution is ratified shall continue in office until his successor is duly elect
ed in the 1979 election and installed.

The returns of the election for the Principal Chief shall be sealed and directed by the lawfully appointed 
election officials to the Secretary-Treasurer, who shall, immediately after the organization of the Council, and be
fore proceeding to other business, open and publish the same in the presence of a majority of the Council. The 
person having the highest number of votes, shall be the Principal Chief; but if two (2) or more shall be equal and 
highest in votes, one of them shall be chosen by a vote of the Council. The manner of determining contested 
elections shall be as directed by Cherokee law.

SECTION 2. The Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation shall be a citizen of the Cherokee Nation of Okla
homa in accordance with Article III. He shall have been born within boundaries of the United States of America, 
its territories or possessions; and he shall have obtained the age of thirty (30) years at the time of his election land 
be a member by blood of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma.

SECTION 3. The qualified electors shall elect a Deputy Principal Chief, who shall possess the same qualifi
cations as the Principal Chief, for a term of four (4) years at the same time and in the same manner as herein 
provided for the election of the Principal Chief, provided, that the initial election of the Deputy Principal Chief 
shall take place in conjunction with the first Council election pursuant to this Constitution and in accordance 
with Section 1 of this Article.
 
 

 
 
 SECTION 4. In case of the absence of the Principal Chief from office due to his death, resignation, removal 
or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve upon the Deputy 
Principal Chief for the remaining portion of the four (4) year term to which the Principal Chief has been elected. 
In case of disability, such powers shall continue during the term of such disability. Vacancies in the office of the 
Deputy Principal Chief shall be filled by the Council.

SECTION 5. The Council may, in the case of removal, death, resignation or disability of both the Principal 
Chief and the Deputy Principal Chief, provide by law what officer shall then act as Principal Chief until the dis
ability be removed or a successor shall be elected.

SECTION 6. The Principal Chief and Deputy Principal Chief shall, at stated times, receive for their service 

a compensation not inconsistent with Article X.

SECTION 7. Before the Principal Chief assumes his office, he shall take the oath or affirmation as provided 

for in Article XIII.

SECTION 8. The Principal Chief may on extraordinary occasions convene the Council at the seat of govern
ment pursuant to Article V, Section 5, and such notice and other laws as may be prescribed by the Council. The 
purpose of said meetings must be stated and the Council may consider only such matters as are specified in the 
call of the extraordinary meetings. Before the extraordinary meetings may be legally sufficient to conduct busi
ness, a quorum of the Council must be present.

SECTION 9. At every session of the Council, and immediately upon its organization, the Principal Chief 
shall communicate by message, delivered to the Council, upon the condition of the Cherokee Nation; and shall 
recommend such matters to the Council as he shall judge expedient.

SECTION 10. The Principal Chief shall cause the laws of the Cherokee Nation to be faithfully executed, and 
shall conduct in person and in such manner as shall be prescribed by law all communications and business of 
the Cherokee Nation. The Principal Chief may cause to be formed and operated trusts, the beneficiary of which 
shall be the Cherokee Nation and these trusts shall be granted such powers as provided by law for public trusts. 
Authorization for these trusts, however, must be approved by a majority vote of the Council.

SECTION 11. The Deputy Principal Chief shall, by virtue of his office, aid and advise the Principal Chief in 
the administration of the government and shall be President of the Council, but shall vote only for the purpose 
of breaking a tie vote.

SECTION 12. Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as preventing the Principal Chief from ap

pointing such administrative assistants as he deems proper.
 
 

ARTICLE VII

JUDICIAL

 
 There is hereby created a Judicial Appeals Tribunal composed of three (3) members all of whom must be 
admitted to practice law before the highest Court of the State of which they are residents, and all of whom shall 
be members of the Cherokee Nation, appointed by the Principal Chief and approved by the Council for such 
terms as the Council may provide. The purpose of this Tribunal shall be to hear and resolve any disagreements 
arising under any provisions of this Constitution or any enactment of the Council. The Council shall provide for 
a procedure which shall insure that any litigant receives due process of law together with prompt and speedy 
relief, and shall generally follow that portion of the Oklahoma Statutes known as the Administrative Procedures 
Act, Title 75, Oklahoma Statutes, 301 et. seq. The decision of the Judicial Appeals Tribunal shall be final 
insofar as the judicial process of the Cherokee Nation is concerned. 
 
 
-

 ARTICLE VIII

CABINET

 
 There shall be a cabinet composed of the following persons who shall be members of the Cherokee Nation: 
Secretary-Treasurer 
Secretary of Health, Education and Welfare 
Secretary of Commerce and Industrial Development
General Counsel 
Secretary of Communications 

These persons shall be appointed by the Principal Chief and approved by the Council. The Council, on 
Recommendation of the Chief only, may create additional cabinet positions and departments. The Chief shall 
prescribe the duties and responsibilities of cabinet members. Cabinet members shall be authorized to appoint 
such staff and other assistants as they deem necessary. The Council may, with recommendation of the Principal 
Chief, abolish any established cabinet position or function or revise the title or responsibilities of any foregoing 
department or function.
 
 

ARTICLE IX

ELECTION

 
 SECTION 1. The Council shall enact an appropriate law not inconsistent with the provisions of this Con
stitution that will govern the conduct of all elections, provided that the initial election of the Council and Deputy 
Principal Chief shall be conducted pursuant to rules and regulation promulgated by the Principal Chief and the 
provisions set forth in Articles V and VI of this Constitution, notwithstanding, the Principal Chief or Council 
may adopt rules requiring a majority vote for any elective office.

SECTION 2. Any member by blood of the Cherokee Nation at least twenty-five years of age on the date of 
the election may be a candidate for the Council. No person who shall have been convicted of or has pled guilty 
or has pled no defense to a felony charge under the laws of the United States of America, or of any State, Terri
tory, or Possession thereof, shall be eligible to hold any office or appointment of honor, profit, or trust within 
this Nation unless such person has received a pardon. Any person who holds any office of honor, profit, or trust 
in any other tribe of Indians, either elective or appointive, shall be ineligible to hold simultaneously any office of 
honor, profit, or trust of the Cherokee Nation unless approved by the Council.

SECTION 3. All elections shall be determined by secret balloting.
 
 

ARTICLE X

FISCAL

 
 SECTION 1. The fiscal year shall commence on the first day of July in each year, unless otherwise provided 

by law.

SECTION 2. The Council shall provide by law for an annual expenditure of funds, and the source from 
which funds are to be derived, to defray the estimated expenses of the Executive, Council, Cabinet, and Depart
ments of Government of the Cherokee Nation for each fiscal year. The budget shall not exceed estimated 
revenues.

SECTION 3. At least thirty (30) days prior to the convening of each regular session of the Council, the Sec
retary-Treasurer shall make and present to the Council an itemized estimate of the revenue to be received by th 
Cherokee Nation, together with a statement of the sources from which revenues are to be received under th 
laws, grants, judgments, interests, and any other sources in effect at the time such estimate is made for the next 
ensuing fiscal year. The Secretary-Treasurer shall prepare annual financial statements reflecting the results of 
operations of all tribal activities and shall prepare a consolidated balance sheet in conformity with generally ac
cepted accounting principles within sixty (60) days after the end of the fiscal year.

SECTION 4. The Council shall require that records be maintained of all funds, monies, accounts and 
indebtedness and all other accounts bearing upon the fiscal interests of the Cherokee Nation by the use of a uni
form system of accounting which records and financial statements shall be audited by a Certified Public 
Accountant or as otherwise may be prescribed by the Council prior to the submission of said accounts to the 
Council.

SECTION 5. The Secretary-Treasurer shall be authorized to accept all grants, donations of money, interest 
of funds of the Cherokee Nation, judgments and any and all other sources of monies available to the Cherokee 
Nation for the uses and purposes and upon the conditions and limitations for which the same are granted or 
donated; and the faith of the Cherokee Nation is hereby pledged to preserve such grants and donations as a 
sacred trust, and to keep the same for the use and purposes for which they were granted or donated.

SECTION 6. The Council shall have the authority to invest funds or money of the Cherokee Nation and the 
preference to be given to the security for such investments, the manner of selecting the securities, prescribing the 
rules, regulations, restrictions and conditions upon which the funds shall be loaned or invested, provided that no 
investment shall be in mortgages other than first mortgages only, and do all things necessary for the safety of the 
funds and permanence of the investments. If required by law, such investments would be subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior.

SECTION 7. The credit of the Cherokee Nation shall not be given, pledged, or loaned to any individual, 
firm, company, corporation, or association without the approval of the Council. The Cherokee Nation shall not 
make any donations by gift, or otherwise, to any individual, firm, company, corporation, or association without 
the approval of the Council.

SECTION 8. All laws authorizing the expenditures of money by and on behalf of the Cherokee Nation shall 
specify the purpose for which the money is to be used, and the money so designated shall be used for no other 
purpose. Annual expenditures shall not exceed the available funds.

SECTION 9. General laws shall be enacted by the Council providing for the deposit of funds of the Cher
okee Nation, and the depository thereof, and such funds shall be under the control of the Secretary-Treasurer, 
under such terms and conditions as shall be designated by said Council and under such laws which shall provide 
for the protection of said funds.

SECTION 10. No official, member or officer of the Council, Cabinet Member, employee of any official, 
Council, Cabinet, or subdivisions thereof, or any person employed in any capacity by the Cherokee Nation, shall 
receive from any individual, partnership, corporation, or entity doing business with the -Cherokee Nation directly 
or indirectly, any interest, profit, benefits or gratuity, other than wages, salary, per diem, or expenses, specifically 
provided by law.

SECTION 11. All officers, elected or appointed, who are authorized by this Constitution or any subsequent 
legislation to a position of trust over any land, property, accounts or monies, shall execute an official surety bond 
in the amount as may be required by the Council, and such surety bonds shall inure to the benefit of and be 
paid for by the Cherokee Nation for whose protection or surety the same shall be required and in no event shall 
said surety bond be other than by a Licensed Insurance Company, authorized to do business in the State of 
Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE XI

REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 SECTION 1. The Principal Chief and the Deputy Principal Chief shall be subject to removal from office for

willful neglect of duty, corruption in office, habitual drunkeness, incompetency or any conviction involving moral 
turpitude committed while in office.

SECTION 2. All other elective officers shall be subject to removal from office in such manner and for such 

causes as may be provided by laws passed by the Council.

SECTION 3. The Council shall pass such laws as are necessary for carrying into effect the provisions of this 

Article, insuring therein that due process is afforded the accused.
 
 

ARTICLE XII 

EMPLOYEE RIGHTS

 
 No employee, who having served in a position at least one (1) year, shall be removed from the employment 

of the Cherokee Nation except for cause. The employee shall be afforded a hearing by the Judicial Appeals 
Tribunal under such rules and procedures as may be prescribed by the Council. These rules and procedures 
however, must follow, as nearly as practicable, the provisions of the Oklahoma Administrative Procedures Act, 
Title 75, Oklahoma Statutes 301 et. seq.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII

OATH

 
 SECTION 1. All officers elected or appointed shall, before entering upon the duties of their respective 

offices, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation:

“I do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I will faithfully execute the duties of...................... ..................................
of the Cherokee Nation, and will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitution 
of the Cherokee Nation, and of the United States of America. I swear or affirm further, that I will d 
everything within my power to promote the culture, heritage and traditions of the Cherokee Nation.”

SECTION 2. The foregoing oath shall be administered by any person authorized by the Council to adminis

ter oaths. The oath shall be filed in the Office of the Secretary-Treasurer.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV

CLANS

 
 Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to prohibit the right of any Cherokee to belong to a recog 

nized clan or organization in the Cherokee Nation. 

r
 
 

ARTICLE XV

INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND AMENDMENT

 
 SECTION 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article V, the people of the Cherokee Nation reserve t< 
themselves the power to propose laws and amendments to this Constitution and to enact or reject the same at the 
polls independent of the Council, and also reserve power at their own option to approve or reject at the polls anj 
act of the Council.
 
 

 
 
 SECTION 2. Any amendment or amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by the Council, and if 
the same shall be agreed to by a majority of all the members of the Council, such proposed amendment or 
amendments shall, with the yeas and nays thereon, be entered into the Journal and referred by the Secretary
Treasurer to the people for their approval or rejection, at the next regular general election, except when the 
Council, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote, shall order a special election for that purpose. If a majority of all the register
ed voters voting at such election shall vote in favor of any amendment thereto, it shall thereby become a part of 
this Constitution.

SECTION 3. The first power reserved by the people of the Cherokee Nation is the initiative and ten per cent 
of the registered voters shall have the right to propose any legislative measure by petition and fifteen per cent of 
the registered voters shall have the right to propose amendments to the constitution by petition, and every such 
petition shall include the full text of the measure so proposed. The second power is the referendum, and it may 
be ordered (except as to laws necessary for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety), 
either by petition signed by five per cent of the registered voters or by the Council as other enactments are 
effectuated. The ratio and per cent of registered voters hereinbefore stated shall be based upon the total number 
of votes cast at the last general election for the officer receiving the highest number of votes at such election.
SECTION 4. Referendum petitions shall be filed with the Secretary-Treasurer not more than ninety days 
after the final adjournment of the session or meeting of the council which passed the bill on which the 
referendum is demanded. The veto power of the Principal Chief shall not extend to measures voted on by the 
people. All elections on measures referred to the people of the Cherokee Nation shall be had at the next regular 
general election except when the Council or the Principal Chief shall order a special election for the express 
purpose of making such reference. Any measure referred to the people by the initiative shall take effect and be 
in force when it shall have been approved by a majority of the votes cast in such election. Any measure referred 
to the people by the referendum shall take effect and be in force when it shall have been approved by a majority 
of the votes cast thereon and provided that no measure which is required to be approved by the President of the 
United States or his authorized representative shall be effective until approved.

SECTION 5. Petitions and orders for the initiative and for the referendum shall be filed with the Secretary
Treasurer and addressed to the Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, who shall submit the same to the people. 
The Council shall make suitable provisions for carrying into effect the provisions of this article.

SECTION 6. The referendum may be demanded by the people against one or more items, sections or parts 
of any enactment of the Council in the same manner in which such power may be exercised against a complete 
enactment. The filing of a referendum petition against one or more items, sections or parts of an enactment shall 
not delay the remainder of such act from becoming operative.

SECTION 7. If two or more amendments are proposed they shall be submitted in such manner that electors 

may vote for or against them separately.

SECTION 8. No proposal for the amendment of this Constitution which is submitted to the voters shall em
brace more than one general subject and the voters shall vote separately for or against each proposal submitted; 
provided, however, that in the submission of proposals for the amendment of this Constitution by articles, which 
embrace a general subject, each proposed article shall be deemed a single proposal or proposition.

SECTION 9. No convention shall be called by the Council to propose a new Constitution, unless the law 
providing for such convention shall first be approved by the people on a referendum vote at a regular or special 
election. Any amendments, alterations, revisions or new Constitution, proposed by such convention, shall be sub
mitted to the electors of the Cherokee Nation at a general or special election and be approved by a majority of 
the electors voting thereon, before the same shall become effective. The question of such proposed convention 
shall be submitted to the members of the Cherokee Nation at least once in every twenty (20) years.

SECTION 10. No amendment or new Constitution shall become effective without the approval of the Presi

dent of the United States or his authorized representative.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI

 
 SUPERSEDES OLD CONSTITUTION 1839

The provisions of this Constitution overrule and supersede the provisions of the Cherokee Nation Constitu

tion enacted the 6th day of September 1839.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII

SEAT OF GOVERNMENT

 
 The Seat of Government of the Cherokee Nation shall be at Tahlequah, Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII

ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution shall become effective when approved by the President of the United States or his 
authorized representative and when ratified by the qualified voters of the Cherokee Nation at an election con
ducted pursuant to rules and regulations promulgated by the Principal Chief. It shall be engrossed on parchment 
and signed by the Principal Chief and the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be filed in the office of the Cherokee 
Nation and sacredly preserved as fundamental law of the Cherokee Nation.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I,  MORRIS THOMPSON, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, pursuant 

to the authority granted me in the Act of July 9, 1832

(4 Stat. 564), hereby approve the Constitution of the Cherokee 

Nation of Oklahoma to become effective upon its ratification 

by the qualified voters of the Cherokee Nation as provided for 

in Article XVIII of said constitution.

s/ MORRIS THOMPSON

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: September 5, 1975
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to the election authorized by the Principal Chief of 

the Cherokee Nation, the foregoing Constitution of the Cherokee 

Nation of Oklahoma was submitted to the qualified voters of the 

Cherokee Nation and was on June 26, 1976, ratified by a vote of 

6,028 for and 785 against.

s/ Kenneth E. Wright

Chairman, Cherokee Registration Committee

s/ Thomas V. Thorne 
Vice Chairman 

s/ Arye Gregory 
Secretary

s/ Buddy Holt 

Member

s/ Phillip Viles 

Member

June 26, 1976

