 
 THE ACT OF UNION  
 

BETWEEN THE 

EASTERN AND WESTERN CHEROKEES,

THE

CONSTITUTION

AND

AMENDMENTS,

AND THE

LAWS 

OF THE 

CHEROKEE NATION,

PASSED 


DURING THE SESSION OP 1868 AND SUBSEQUENT SESSIONS.

TAH-LE-QUAH: CHEROKEE NATION.

NATIONAL PRESS.—EDWIN ARCHER, PRINTER.

1870.
 
 

ACT OF UNION

BETWEEN

THE EASTERN AND WESTERN 

 
 CHEROKEES.

Whereas, our Fathers have existed as a separate and 
distinct Nation, in the possession and exercise of the essential 
and appropriate attributes of sovreignty, from a period ex
tending into antiuity, beyond the records and memory of man; 
and whereas, these attributes, with the rights and franchises 
which they involve, remain still in full force and virtue; as 
do also the national and social relations of the Cherokee 
People to each other and to the body politic, excepting in 
those particulars which have grown out of the provisions 
of the treaties of 1817 and 1819, between the United States 
and the Cherokee Nation, under which a portion of our 
people removed to this country and became a separate commu
nity; but the force of circumstances having recently compelled 
the body of the Eastern Cherokees to remove to this country, 
thus bringing together again the two branches of the ancient 
Cherokee Family; it has become essential to the general 
welfare that a Union should be formed and a system 
of Government matured, adapted to their present condition, 
and providing equally for the protection of each individual 
in the enjoyment of all his rights.

Therefore, we, the People composing the Eastern and 
Western Cherokee Nation, in National Convention assembled, 
by virtue of our original and unalienable rights, do hereby 
solemnly and mutually agree to form ourselves into one body 
politic, under the style and title of the Cherokee Nation.

In view of the Union now formed, and for the purpose 
of making satisfactory adjustments of all unsettled business 
which may have arisen before the consummation of this 
Union, we agree that such business shall be settled according 
to the provisions of the respective laws under which it 

originated, and the Courts of the Cherokee Nation shall be 
governed in their decisions accordingly. Also, that the Dele
gation authorized by the Eastern Cherokees to make arrange
ments with Major General Scott, for their removal to this 
country, shall continue in charge of that business, with their 
present powers, until it shall be finally closed. And, also, 
that all rights and titles to Public Cherokee Lands on the 
East or West of the River Mississippi, with all other public 
interests which may have vested in either branch of the Cher
okee Family, whether inherited from our Fathers or derived 
from any other source, shall henceforward vest entire and un
impaired in the Cherokee Nation, as constituted by this Union.
Given under our hands, at Illinois Camp-Ground, this 12th 

day of July, 1838.

By order of the National Convention: 
 
 

GEORGE LOWREY, 

 
 President of the Eastern Cherokees. 

GEORGE GUESS, his x mark,

President of the Western Cherokees

R. TAYLOR, V. P.,
JAMES BROWN., V. P., 
TE-KE-CIIU-LAS-KEE, V. P., 

GEORGE HICKS, 
JOHN BENGE, 
THOMAS FOREMAN, 
ARCHIBALD CAMPBELL, 
JESSE BUSHYHEAD, 
LEWIS ROSS, 
EDWARD GUNTER,
 TE-NAII-LA-WE-STAH, 
STEPHEN FOREMAN, 

 
  
 DANIEL McCOY,

By order of the National Convention. 
 

 JOHN ROSS,
 
 Principal Chief, Eastern Cherokees, 
 
 
 GOING SNAKE, 

 
 Speaker of Council.

TOBACCO WILL, V. P. 
DAVID MELTON, V. P., 
JOHN DREW, V. P., 

GEORGE BREWER, 
THOMAS CANDY, 
MOSES PARRIS, 
JAMES CAMPBELL, 
LOONEY RILEY, 
CHARLES GOURD, 
LEWIS MELTON, 
YOUNG WOLF, 
CHARLES COODEY, 
AH-STO-LA-TA, 
JACK SPEARS, 

LOONEY PRICE.
By order of the National Convention. 

JOHN LOONEY, his x mark, 

August 23d, 1839.

Acting Principal Chief of Western 
 Cherokees.

The foregoing instrument was read, considered, and ap

proved by us, this 23d day of August, 1839.

Aaron Price, Major Pullum, Young Elders, Deer Track, 
Young Puppy, Turtle Fields, July, The Eagle, The Crying 
Buffalo; and a great number of respectable Old Settlers and 
late Emigrants, too numerous to be copied.
 
 

 
THE 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 

 
 CHEROKEE NATION.

The Eastern and Western Cherokees having again re-united, 
and become one body politic, under the style and title of the 
Cherokee Nation: Therefore,

We, the people of the Cherokee Nation, in National Con
vention assembled, in order to establish justice, insure tran
quility, promote the common welfare, and to secure to our
selves and our posterity the blessings of freedom—acknowl
edging, with humility and gratitude, the goodness of the Sov - 
ereign Ruler of the Universe in permitting us so to do, and 
imploring His aid and guidance in its accomplishment—do 
ordain and establish this Constitution for the government 
of the Cherokee Nation.

Article I.

Sec. 1. The boundary of the Cherokee Nation shall be 
that described in the treaty of 1833 between the United 
States and Western Cherokees, subject to such extension as 
may be made in the adjustment of the unfinished business 
with the United States.

Sec. 2. The lands of the Cherokee Nation shall remain 
common property; but the improvements made thereon, and 
in the possession of the citizens of the Nation, are the exclu
sive and indefeasible property of the citizens respectively who 
made, or may rightfully be in possession of them: Provided, 
That the citizens of the Nation possessing exclusive and inde
feasible right to their improvements, as expressed in this ar
ticle, shall possess no right or power to dispose of their im
provements, in any manner whatever, to the United States, in
dividual States, or to individual citizens thereof; and that, 

whenever any citizen shall remove with his effects out of the 
limits of this Nation, and become a citizen of any other Gov
ernment, all his rights and privileges as a citizen of this Nation 
shall cease: Provided, nevertheless, That the National Council 
shall have power to re-admit, by law, to all the rights 
of citizenship, any such person or persons who may, at any 
time, desire to return to the Nation, on memorializing the 
National Council for such re-admission.

Moreover, the National Council shall have power to adopt 
such laws and regulations as its wisdom may deem expedient 
and proper to prevent citizens from monopolizing improve
ments with the view of speculation.

Article II.

Sec. 1. The power of this Government shall be divided 
into three distinct departments:—the Legislative, the Exec
utive, and the Judicial.

Sec. 2. No person or persons belonging to one of these 
departments shall exercise any of the powers properly belong
ing to either of the others, except in the cases hereinafter 
expressly directed or permitted.

Article III.

Sec. 1. The Legislative power shall be vested in two 
distinct branches:—a National Committee and Council; and 
the style of their acts shall be:—Be it enacted by the 
National Council.

Sec. 2. The National Council shall make provision, by 
law, for laying off the Cherokee Nation into Eight Districts; 
and, if subsequently it should be deemed expedient, one or 
two may be added thereto.

Sec. 3. The National Committee shall consist of two 
members from each District, and the Council shall consist 
of three members from each District, to be chosen by the 
qualified electors in their respective Districts for two years; 
the elections to be held in the respective Districts every two 
years, at such times and places as may be directed by law.

The National Council shall, after the present year, be held 
annually, to be convened on the first Monday in October, at 

such place as may be designated by the National Council, 
or, in case of emergency, by the Principal Chief.

Sec. 4. Before the Districts shall be laid off, any election 
which may take place shall be by general vote of the electors 
throughout the Nation for all officers to be elected.

The first election for all the officers of the Government-— 
Chiefs, Executive Council, Members of the National Council, 
Judges and Sheriffs,—shall be held at Tah-Le-Quah, before 
the rising of this Convention; and the term of service of all 
officers elected previous to the First Monday in October, 1839, 
shall be extended to embrace, in addition to the regular 
Constitutional Term, the time intervening from their election 
to the First Monday in October, 1839.

Sec. 5. No person shall be eligible to a seat in the 
National Council but a free Cherokee Male Citizen, who 
shall have attained to the age of twenty-five years.

The descendants of Cherokee men by all free women, 
except the African Race, whose parents may have been 
living together as man and wife, according to the customs 
and laws of this Nation, shall be entitled to all the rights 
and privileges of this Nation, as Well as the posterity 
of Cherokee women by all free men. No person who is 
of negro or mulatto parentage, either by the father’s or 
the mother’s ride, shall be eligible to hold any office of profit, 
honor, or trust under this Government

Sec. 6. The Electors and Members of the National 
Council shall in all cases, except those of treason, felony, or 
breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their 
attendance at elections, and at the National Council, in 
going to and returning.

Sec. 7. In all Elections by the People, the Electors 

shall vote viva voce.

All Free Male Citizens, who shall have attained to the 
age of eighteen years shall be equally entitled to vote at all 
Public Elections.

Sec. 8. Each Branch of the National Council shall 
judge of the qualifications and returns of its own members; 
and determine the Rules of its Proceedings; punish a Member 
for disorderly behaviour; and, with the concurrence of two-

thirds, expel a Member; but mot a second time for the same 
offence.

Sec. 9. Each Branch of the National Council, when 
assembled, shall choose its own officers; a majority of each 
shall constitute a quorum to do business, But a smaller 
number may adjourn from day to day and compel the 
attendance of absent members, in such manner and under 
such penalty as each Branch may prescribe.

Sec. 10. The Members of the National Committee shall 
each receive from the Public Treasury a compensation for 
their services which shall be three dollars per day during 
their attendance at the National Council; and the Members 
of the Council shall each receive three dollars per day for 
their services during their attendance at the National 
Council, provided that the same may be increased or dimin
ished by law; but no alteration shall take effect during the 
period of service of the Members of the National Council by 
whom such alteration may have been made.

Sec. 11. The National Council shall regulate by law, by 
whom and in what manner, Writs of Elections shall be 
issued io fill the vacancies which may happen in either 
branch thereof.

Sec. 12. Eeach Member of the National Council, before 
he takes his seat, shall take the following oath, or affirma
tion:—I, A. B., do solemnly swear, (ar affirm; as the case 
may be); that I have not obtained my election by bribery, 
treats, or any undue and unlawful means, used by myself or 
others by my desire or approbation for that purpose;—that 
I consider myself constitutionally qualified as a member 
of  —; and that on all questions and measures which
may come before me I will so give my vote and so conduct 
myself as in my judgment shall appear most conducive to the 
interest and prosperity of this Nation, and that I will bear 
true faith and allegiance to the same, and to the utmost 
of my Ability and power observe, conform to, support and 
defend the Constitution thereof.

Sec. 13. No person who may be convicted of felony 
shall be eligible to any office or appointment of honor, profit, 
or trust within this Nation.

Sec. 14. The National Council shall have power to 

make all Laws and Regulations which they shall deem 
necessary and proper for the good of the Nation, which shall 
not be contrary to this Constitution.

Sec. 15. It shall be the duty of the National Council to 
pass such Laws as may be necessary and proper to decide 
dfferences by arbitration, to be appointed by the parties who 
may choose that summary mode of adjustment.

Sec. 16. No power of suspending the laws of this 
Nation shall be exercised, unless by the National Council 
or its authority.

Sec. 17. No Retrospective Law, nor any Law impairing 

the Obligation of Contracts, shall be passed.

Sec. 18. The National Council shall have power to 
make Laws for Laying and Collecting Taxes, for the purpose 
of Raising a Revenue.

Sec. 19. All Bills making Appropriations shall originate 
in the National Committee, but the Council may propose 
Amendments or reject the same. All other Bills may 
originate in either Branch, subject to the concurrence or 
rejection of the other.

Sec. 20. All Acknowledged Treaties shall be the Supreme 
Law of the Land, and the National Council shall have the 
sole power of deciding on the construction of all Treaty 
Stipulations.

Sec. 21. The Council shall have the sole power of Im
peaching. All Impeachments shall be tried by the National 
Committee. When Sitting for that purpose the Member 
shall be upon oath or affirmation; and no person shall be 
convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of the 
Members present.

Sec. 22. The Principal Chief, Assistant Principal Chief, 
and all Civil Officers, shall be liable to Impeachment for 
misdemeanor in office; but judgment in such cases shall not 
extend further than Removal from Office and Disqualification 
to hold any Offiice of Honor, Trust, or Profit under the 
Government of this Nation.

The Party, whether convicted or acquitted, shall, never
theless, be liable to indictment, trial, judgment and punish
ment according to law.

Article IV.

Sec. 1. The Supreme Executive Power of this Nation 
shall be vested in a Principal Chief, who shall be styled the 
Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation.

The Principal Chief shall hold his Office for the Term 
of Four Years; and shall be Elected by the Qualified 
Electors on the same day and at the places where they shall 
respectively vote for Members of the National Council.

The Returns of the Election for Principal Chief shall 
be Sealed Up and directed to the President of the National 
Committee, who shall Open and Publish them in the 
Presence of the National Council Assembled. The Person 
having the Highest Number of Votes shall be Principal 
Chief; but if Two or more shall be Equal and Highest in 
Votes, one of them shall be Chosen by Joint Vote of Both 
Branches of the Council. The manner of determining 
Contested Elections shall be directed by Law.

Sec. 2. No Person except a Natural Born Citizen shall 
be Eligible to the Office of Principal Chief; neither shall 
any Person be Eligible to that Office who shall not have 
attained to the age of Thirty-Five Years.

Sec. 3. There shall also be Chosen at the same time, by 
the Qualified Electors in the same manner for Four Years, 
an Assistant Principal Chief, who shall have attained to 
the age of Thirty-Five Years.

Sec. 4. In case of the Removal of the Principal Chief from 
Office, or of his Death or Resignation, or Inability to 
Discharge the Powers and Duties of the said Office, the same 
shall devolve on the Assistant Principal Chief until the 
Disability be removed or the Vacancy filled by the National 
Council.

Sec. 5. The National Council may by Law provide for 
the case of Removal, Death, Resignation, or Disability 
of both the Principal and Assistant Principal Chief, declaring 
what Officer shall then act as Principal Chief until the Dis
ability be removed or a Principal Chief shall be Elected.

Sec. 6. The Principal Chief and Assistant Principal 
Chief shall, at stated times, receive for their Services a Com
pensation, which shall neither be increased nor diminished 

during the period for which they shall have been elected; and 
they shall not receive within that period any other emolu
ment from the Cherokee Nation or any other Government

Sec. 7. Before the Principal Chief enters upon the ex
ecution of his office, he shall take the following oath or 
affirmation:—

“I do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I will faithfully 
execute the duties of Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, 
and will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and 
defend the Constitution of the Cherokee Nation.”

Sec. 8. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the 

National Council at the Seat of Government.

Sec. 9. He shall, from time to time, give to the National 
Council information of the state of the Government, and 
recommend to their consideration such measures as he may 
deem expedient.

Sec. 10. He shall take care that the laws be faithfully 

executed.

Sec. 11. It shall be his duty to visit the different Districts, 
at least, once in two years, to inform himself of the general 
condition of the country.

Sec. 12. The Assistant Principal Chief shall, by virtue 
of his office, aid and advise the Principal Chief in the 
Administration of the Government at all times during his 
continuance in office.

Sec. 13. Vacancies that may occur in offices, the ap
pointment of which is vested in the National Council, shall 
be filled by the Principal Chief, during the Recess of the 
National Council, by granting Commissions which shall 
expire at the end of the next Session thereof.

Sec. 14. Every Bill which shall pass both Branches 
of the National Council shall, before it becomes a Law, be 
presented to the Principal Chief; if he approve, he shall sign 
it, but if not, he shall return it, with, his objections, to that 
Branch in which it may have originated, who shall enter the 
objections at large on their journals, and proceed to recon
sider it; if, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of that 
Branch shall agree to pass the Bill, it shall be sent, together 
with the objections, to the other Branch, by which it shall 
likewise be reconsidered, and if approved by two-thirds of that 

Branch, it shall become a law. If any Bill shall not be 
returned by the Principal Chief within five days, (Sundays 
excepted), after the same has been presented to him, it shall 
become a law, in like manner as if he had signed it; unless 
the National Council, by their adjournment, prevent its 
return; in which case it shall be a law, unless sent back 
within three days after their next meeting.

Sec. 15. Members of the National Council, and all 
Officers, Executive and Judicial, shall be Bound by Oath to 
Support the Constitution of this Nation, and to Perform the 
Duties of their Respective Offices with Fidelity.

Sec. 16. In case of disagreement between the two 
Branches of the National Council, with respect to the time 
of adjournment, the Principal Chief shall have power to 
adjourn the same to such time as he may deem proper; 
Provided, it be not a period beyond the next Constitutional 
Meeting thereof.

Sec. 17. The Principal Chief shall, during the Session 

of the National Council, attend at the Seat of Government.

Sec. 18. There shall be a Council composed of Five 
Persons, to be appointed by the National Council, whom the 
Principal Chief shall have full power, at his discretion, to 
assemble. He, together with the Assistant Principal Chief, 
and the Councillors, or a Majority of them, may, from time 
to time, hold and keep a Council for ordering and directing 
the affairs of the Nation 
according to law; Proviedd, the 
National Council shall have power to reduce the number, 
if deemed expedient, after the first term of service, to a 
number not less than three.

Sec. 19. The Members of the Executive Council shall 

be chosen for the Term of Two Years.

Sec. 20. The Resolutions and Advice of the Council 
shall be Recorded in a Register and Signed by the Members 
agreeing thereto, which may be called for by either Branch 
of the National Council, and any Councillor may enter his 
dissent to the Majority.

Sec. 21. The Treasurer of the Cherokee Nation shall be 
Chosen by a Joint Vote of Both Branches of the National 
Council for a Term of Four Years.

Sec. 22. The Treasurer shall, before entering upon the

Duties of his Office, give Bond to the Nation, with Sureties 
to the satisfaction of the National Council, for the Faithful 
Discharge of his Trust.

Sec. 23. No Money shall be Drawn from the Treasury 
but by Warrant from the Principal Chief, and in conse
quence of Appropriations made by Law.

Sec. 24. It shall be the Duty of the Treasurer to 
Receive All Public Moneys, and to Make a Regular State
ment and Account of the Receipts and Expenditures of All 
Public Moneys at the Annual Session of the National Council.

Article V.

Sec. 1. The Judicial Powers shall be Vested in a Supreme 
Court, and such Circuit and Inferior Courts as the National 
Council may, from time to time, Ordain and Establish.

Sec. 2. The Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts 
shall hold their Commissions for the Term of Four Years; 
but any of them may be Removed From Office, on the Address 
of Two-Thirds of Each Branch of the National Council to 
the Principal Chief for that purpose.

Sec. 3. The Judges Of the Supreme and Circuit Courts 
shall, at Stated Times, Receive a Compensation Which shall 
not be Diminishied during their Continuance In Office; but 
they shall Receive No Fees or Perquisites of Office, nor 
hold any other Office of Profit or Trust under the Govern
ment of this Nation or any other Power.

Sec. 4. No Person shall be appointed a Judge of any 
of the Courts until he shall have attained to the Age 
of Thirty Years.

Sec. 5. The Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts 
shall be Elected by the Rational Council, and there shall be 
appointed in Each District as many Justices of the Peace as 
it may be deemed expedient for the Public Good; whose 
Powers, Duties, and Duration In Office, shall be clearly 
Designated by Law.

Sec. 6. The Judges of the Supreme Court and of the 
Circuit Courts shall have Complete Criminal Jurisdiction in 
such Cases and in such Manner as may be pointed out 
by Law,

Sec. 7. No Judge shall Sit on Trial of any Cause when 
the Parties are Connected by Affinity or Consanguinity, 
except by Consent of the Parties.

In case All the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be 
Interested in the Issue of any Cause, or Belated to all or 
either of the Parties, the National Council may Provide by 
Law for the Selection of a Suitable Number of Persons, 
of Good Character and Knowledge, for the Determination 
thereof, and who shall be Specially Commissioned for the 
Adjudication of such Case by the Principal Chief.

Sec. 8. All Writs, and other Process, shall run: “In 
the Name of the Cherokee Nation”; and bear Test and 
be Signed by the Respective Clerks.

Sec. 9. Indictments shall conclude:—“Against the Peace 

and Dignity of the Cherokee Nation".

Sec. 10. The Supreme Court shall, after the Present 
Year, Hold its Session Annually at the Seat of Government; 
to be Convened on the First Monday of October, in Each 
Year.

Sec. 11. In all Criminal Prosecutions, the Accused shall 
have the Right of being Heard; of Demanding the Nature 
and Cause of the Accusation; of Meeting the Witnesses face 
to face; of having Compulsory Process for obtaining Wit
nesses in his or their Favor; and in Prosecutions by Indict
ment or Information, a Speedy, Public Trial, by an Impartial 
Jury of Vicinage; nor shall the Accused be Compelled 
to Give Evidence against himself.

Sec. 12. The People shall bi SefttrO ih their Persons, 
Houses, Papers, and Possessions, from Unreasonable Seizures 
and Searches; and No Warrant to Search Any Place, or to 
Seize any Person or Things, shall Issue without Describing 
them as nearly as may be, nor without Good Cause, Supported 
by Oath or Affirmation.

Sec. 13. All Persons shall be Bailable by Sufficient 
Securities, unless for Capital Offences, where the Proof is 
Evident, or Presumption Great.

Sec. 1. No Person who Denies the being of a God, or a 

Article VL.

Future State of Reward and Punishment, shall Hold any 
Office in the Civil Department in this Nation.

Sec. 2. The Free Exercise of Religious Worship, and 
Serving God without distinction, shall, Forever, Be Enjoyed 
within the Limits of this Nation; Provided, that this Liberty 
of Conscience shall not be so Construed as to excuse Acts 
of Licentiousness, or Justify Practices Inconsistent with the 
Peace or Safety of this Nation.

Sec. 3. When the National Council shall determine the 
expediency of Appointing Delegates, or other Public Agents, 
for the purpose of transacting business with the Government 
of the United States, the Principal Chief shall recommend, 
and, by the Advice and Consent of the National Committee, 
Appoint and Commission such Delegates, or Public Agents, 
accordingly. On all matters of interest, touching the Rights 
of the Citizens of this Nation, which may require the 
attention of the United States Government, the Principal 
Chief shall keep up a Friendly Correspondence with that 
Government, through the medium of its Proper Officers.

Sec. 4. All Commissions shall be:—“In the Name and 
by the Authority of the Cherokee Nation;” and be Sealed 
with the Seal of the Nation, and Signed by the Principal 
Chief. The Principal Chief shall make use of his Private 
Seal until a National Seal shall be Provided.

Sec. 5. A Sheriff shall be Elected in Each District, by 
the Qualified Electors thereof, who shall Hold his Office 
Two Years, unless Sooner Removed. Should a Vacancy 
occur, Subsequent to an Election, it shall be Filled by the 
Principal Chief, as in other cases; and the Person so 
Appointed, shall Continue in Office until the next Regular
Election.

Sec. 6. No Person shall, for the same offence, be Twice 
put in Jeopardy of Life or Limb; nor shall the Property 
of any person be Taken and Applied to Public Use without 
a just and Fair Compensation: Provided, That nothing in 
this clause shall be so Construed as to Impair the Right and 
Power of the National Council to lay and Collect Taxes.

Sec. 7. The Right of Trial by Jury, shall remain Invio
late, and every person, for Injury Sustained in Person,

Property, or Reputation, shall have Remedy by due Course 
of Law.

Sec. 8. The Appointment of All Officers, not otherwise 
Directed by this Constitution, shall be Vested in the National 
Council.

Sec. 9. Religion, Morality, and Knowledge, being neces
sary to Good Government, the Preservation of Liberty and 
the Happiness of Mankind; Schools, and the Means of Edu
cation, Shall ForeVer be Encouraged in this Nation.

Sec. 10. The National Council may Propose such Amend
ments to this Constitution, as Two-Thirds of Each Branch
may deem Expedient; and the Principal Chief shall Issue a 
Proclamation, Directing all Civil Officers of the Several 
Districts to Promulgate the same as extensively as possible 
within their respective Districts, at least Six Months Previous 
to the Next General Election. And if, at the First Session
of the National Council, after such General Election, Two- 
Thirds of Each Branch shall, by Ayes and Noes, ratify such 
Proposed Amendments, they shall be Valid, to all Intent and 
Purposes, as Parts of this Constitution: Provided, That such 
Proposed Amendments shall be Read on Three Several Days 
in Each Branch, as well when the same are Proposed, as 
when they are Ratified.

Done in Convention: at Tah-Le-Quah, Cherokee Nation.

This Sixth Day Of September, 1839.
 
 

GEORGE LOWREY,

 
 Hair Conrad, his x mark, 
John Benge, his x mark, 
Archibald Campbell, his x mark, 
Thomas Candy, John Drew, 
George Guess, his x mark, 
Walter Scott Adair, 
Young Elders, his x mark, 
Will. Shorey Coodey, 
Thomas Foreman, Richard Taylor, 
Thomas Fox Taylor, 
O-kan-sto-tah Logan, his x mark, 
James Spears, his x mark, 
John Spears, 
Stephen Foreman, 
Young Glass, his x mark, 
Looney Price, 
Tobacco Win, his x mark, 
Major Pullum, his x mart, 
Moses Parris, 
George Washington Gunter,

President of the National Convention.
Kenah Logan, his x mark
Young Wolf, Joseph Martin Lynch, 
Sal-la-tee-skee Watts, his x mark, 
George Brewer, his x mark, 
Joshua Buffington, 
Jesse Bushyhead, Jesse Russell, 
John Fletcher Boot, his x mark, 
Crying Buffalo, his x mark, 
Bark Flute, his x mart, 
Oo-la-yo-a, hie x mark, 
Soft-Shell Turtle, his x mark, 
Edward Gunter, 
Daniel Colston, his x mark, 
Lewis Roes, George Hicks, 
Turtle Fields, his x mark, 
Elijah Hicks, 
Tah-lah-see-nee, his x mart, 
James Brown, Charles Coodey, 
Riley Keys, Daniel McCoy, 
Lewis Melton,

