This volume was donated to LLMC 
to enrich its on-line offerings and 
for purposes of long-term preservation by

The Library of Congress

MGrTAL
 
  
 

THE

CONSTITUTION AND LAWS

OF THE

 
 CHEROKEE NATION: 
 

PASSED AT

TAHLEQUAH, CHEROKEE NATION, 


 
  
 1839-51.

TAHLEQUAH, CHEROKEE NATION:

1852.

MGrTAL 
 

ACT OF UNION

BETWEEN

 
 THE EASTERN AND WESTERN CHEROKEES.

Whereas our Fathers have existed, as a separate and dis
tinct Nation, in the possession and exercise of the essential 
and appropriate attributes of sovereignty, from a period ex
tending into antiquity, beyond the records and memory of 
man: And whereas these attributes, with the rights and 
franchises which they involve, remain still in full force and 
virtue, as do also the national and social relations of the 
Cherokee people to each other and to the body politic, ex
cepting in those particulars which have grown out of the 
provisions of the treaties of 1817 and 1819 between the Uni
ted States and the Cherokee Nation, under which a portion 
of our people removed to this country and became a separate 
community : But the force of circumstances having recently 
compelled the body of the Eastern Cherokees to remove to 
this country, thus bringing together again the two branches 
of the ancient Cherokee family, it has become essential to 
the general welfare that a union should be formed, and a 
system of government matured, adapted to their present con
dition, and providing equally for the protection of each indi
vidual in the enjoyment of all his rights:

Therefore we, the people composing the Eastern and Wes
tern. Cherokee Nation, in National Convention assembled, 
by virtue of our original and unalienable rights, do hereby 
solemnly and mutually agree to form ourselves into one body 
politic, under the style and title of the Cherokee Nation.

In view of the union now formed, and for the purpose of 
making satisfactory adjustments of all unsettled business 
which may have arisen before the consummation of this un
ion, we agree that such business shall be settled according 
to the provisions of the respective laws under which it origin

4

ated, and the Courts of the Cherokee Nation shall be govern
ed in their decisions accordingly. Also, that the delegation 
authorized by the Eastern Cherokees to make arrangements 
with Major General Scott for their removal to this country 
shall continue in charge of that business, with their present 
powers, until it shall be finally closed. And also that all 
rights and title to public Cherokee lands on the east or west 
of the river Mississippi, with all other public interests which 
may have vested in either branch of the Cherokee family, 
whether inherited from our Fathers or derived from any other 
source, shall henceforward vest entire and unimpaired in the 
Cherokee Nation, as constituted by this union.

Given under our hands, at Illinois Camp-ground, this 12th 

day of July, 1839.

By order of the National Convention : 
 
 

GEORGE LOWREY, 

 
 President of the Eastern Cherokees.
GEORGE GUESS, his x mark, 
President of the Western Cherokees.

The foregoing instrument was read, considered, and ap

proved by us this 23d day of August, 1839:

Aaron Price, Major Pullum, Young Elders, Deer Track. 
Young Puppy, Turtle Fields, July, The Eagle, The Crying 
Buffalo, and a great number of respectable Old Settlers and 
late Emigrants, too numerous to be copied.
 
 

CONSTITUTION

OF

 
 THE CHEROKEE NATION.

The Eastern and Western Cherokees having again re-unit
ed, and become one body politic, under the style and title of 
the Cherokee Nation : Therefore,

We, the people of the Cherokee Nation, in National Con
vention assembled, in order to establish justice, insure tran
quility, promote the common welfare, and to secure to our
selves and our posterity the blessings of freedom—acknowl
edging, with humility and gratitude, the goodness of the Sove
reign Ruler of the Universe in permitting us so to do, and 
imploring His aid and guidance in its accomplishment—do 
ordain and establish this Constitution for the government of 
the Cherokee Nation.

Article I.

Sec. 1. The boundary of the Cherokee Nation shall be 
that described in the treaty of 1833 between the United States 
and Western Cherokees, subject to such extension as may be 
made in the adjustment of the unfinished business with the 
United States.

Sec. 2. The lands of the Cherokee Nation shall remain 
common property; but the improvements made thereon, and 
in the possession of the citizens of the Nation, are the exclu
sive and indefeasible property of the citizens respectively who 
made, or may rightfully be in possession of them : Provided, 
That the citizens of the Nation possessing exclusive and in
defeasible right to their improvements, as expressed in this 
article, shall possess no right or power to dispose of their im
provements, in any manner whatever, to the United States, 
individual States, or to individual citizens thereof; and that, 
whenever any citizen shall remove with his effects out of the 
limits of this Nation, and become a citizen of any other Gov
ernment, all his rights and privileges as a citizen of this Na
tion shall cease : Provided, nevertheless, That the National

Council shall have power to re-admit, by law, to all the 
rights of citizenship, any such person or persons who may, 
at any time, desire to return to the Nation, on memorializing 
the National Council for such readmission.

Moreover, the National Council shall have power to adopt 
such laws and regulations as its wisdom may deem expedient 
and proper to prevent citizens from monopolizing improve
ments with the view of speculation.

Article II.

Sec. 1. The power of this Government shall be divided 
into three distinct departments—the Legislative, the Execu
tive, and the Judicial.

Sec. 2. No person or persons belonging to one of these 
departments shall exercise any of the powers properly belong
ing to either of the others, except in the cases hereinafter 
expressly directed or permitted.

Article III.

Sec. 1. The Legislative power shall be vested in two dis
tinct branches—a National Committee, and Council; and 
the style of their acts shall be—Be it enacted by the Nation
al Council.

Sec. 2. The National Council shall make provision, by 
law, for laying off the Cherokee Nation into eight Districts; 
and if subsequently it should be deemed expedient, one or 
two may be added thereto.

Sec. 3. The National Committee shall consist of two mem
bers from each District, and the Council shall consist of three 
members from each District, to be chosen by the qualified 
electors in their respective Districts for two years; the elec
tions to be held in the respective Districts every two years, 
at such times and places as may be directed by law.

The National Council shall, after the present year, be held 
annually, to be convened on the first Monday in October, at 
such place as may be designated by the National Council, or, 
in case of emergency, by the Principal Chief.

Sec. 4. Before the Districts shall be laid off, any election 
which may take place shall be by general vote of the electors 
throughout the Nation for all officers to be elected

The first election for all the officers of the Government— 
Chiefs, Executive Council, members of the National Council, 
Judges and Sheriffs—shall be held at Tah-le-quah before the 
rising of this Convention : and the term of service of all offi
cers elected previous to the first Monday in October, 1839, 
shall be extended to embrace, in addition to the regular con
stitutional term, the time intervening from their election to 
the first Monday in October, 1839.

Sec. 5. No person shall be eligible to a seat in the Na
tional Council but a free Cherokee male citizen who shall 
have attained to the age of twenty-five years.

The descendants of Cherokee men by all free women ex
cept the African race, whose parents may have been living 
together as man and wife, according to the customs and laws 
of this Nation, shall be entitled to all the rights and privileges 
of this Nation, as well as the posterity of Cherokee women 
by all free men. No person who is of negro or mulatto pa
rentage, either by the father or mother’s side, shall be eligible 
to hold any office of profit, honor, or trust under this Govern
ment.

Sec. 6. The electors and members of the National Coun
cil shall in all cases, except those of treason, felony, or breach 
of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attend
ance at elections, and at the National Council, in going to 
and returning.

Sec. 7. In all elections by the people, the electors shall 

vote viva voce.

All free male citizens, who shall have attained to the age 
of eighteen years shall be equally entitled to vote at all public 
elections.

Sec. 8. Each branch of the National Council shall judge 
of the qualifications and returns of its own members; and de
termine the rules of its proceedings; punish a member for 
disorderly behaviour, and, with the concurrence of two thirds, 
expel a member; but not a second time for the same offence.
Sec. 9. Each branch of the National Council, when assem
bled, shall choose its own officers; a majority of each shall 
constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may 
adjourn from day to day and compel the attendance of absent 
members in such manner and under such penalty as each 
branch may prescribe.

Sec. 10. The members of the National Council shall each 

receive from the public Treasury a compensaation for their 
services which shall be three dollars per day during their at
tendance at the National Council; and the members of the 
Council shall each receive three dollars per day for their ser
vices during their attendance at the National Council, pro
vided that the same may be increased or diminished by law, 
but no alteration shall take effect during the period of ser
vice of the members of the National Council by whom such 
alteration may have been made.

Sec. 11. The National Council shall regulate by law by 
whom and in what manner, writs of elections shall be issued 
to fill the vacancies which may happen in either branch thereof.
Sec. 12. Each member of the National Council, before he 
takes his seat, shall take the following oath, or affirmation : 
I, A. B. do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be,) 
that I have not obtained my election by bribery, treats, or 
any undue and unlawful means used by myself or others by 
my desire or approbation for that purpose; that I consider my
self constitutionally qualified as a member of------, and that 
on all questions and measures which may come before me I 
will so give my vote and so conduct myself as in my judg
ment shall appear most conducive to the interest and pros
perity of this Nation, and that I will bear true faith and alle
giance to the same, and to the utmost of my ability and pow
er observe, conform to, support and defend the Constitution 
thereof.

Sec. 13. No person who may be convicted of felony shall 
be eligible to any office or appointment of honor, profit, or 
trust within this Nation.

Sec. 14. The National Council shall have power to make 
all laws and regulations which they shall deem necessary and 
proper for the good of the Nation, which shall not be contra
ry to this Constitution.

Sec. 15. It shall be the duty of the National Council to 
pass such laws as may be necessary and proper to decide dif
ferences by arbitration, to be appointed by the parties, who 
may choose that summary mode of adjustment.

Sec. 16. No power of suspending the laws of this Nation 
shall be exercised, unless by the National Council or its au
thority.

Sec. 17. No retrospective law, nor any law impairing the 

obligation of contracts, shall be passed.

Sec. 18. The National Council shall have power to make 
laws for laying and collecting taxes, for the purpose of raising 
a revenue.

Sec. 19. All bills making appropriations shall originate in 
the National Committee, but the Council may propose amend
ments or reject the same; all other bills may originate in eith
er branch, subject to the concurrence or rejection of the 
other.

Sec. 20. All acknowledged treaties shall be the supreme 
law of the land, and the National Council shall have the sole 
power of deciding on the construction of all treaty stipula
tions.

Sec. 21. The Council shall have the sole power of im
peaching. All impeachments shall be tried by the National 
Committee. When setting for that purpose the member shall 
be upon oath or affirmation; and no person shall be convicted 
without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.
Sec. 22. The Principal Chief, assistant Principal Chief, 
and all civil officers shall be liable to impeachment for mis
demeanor in office; but judgement in such cases shall not ex
tend further than removal from office and disqualification to 
hold and office of honor, trust, or profit under the Government 
of this Nation.

The party, whether convicted or acquitted, shall, neverthe
less, be liable to indictment, trial, judgement and punishment 
according to law.

Article IV.

Sec. 1. The Supreme Executive Power, of this Nation 
shall be vested in a Principal Chief, who shall be styled the 
Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation.

The Principal Chief shall hold his office for the term of four 
years; and shall be elected by the qualified electors on the 
same day and at the places where they shall respectively vote 
for members to the National Council.

The returns of the election for Principal Chief shall be seal
ed up and directed to the President of the National Commit
tee, who shall open and publish them in the presence of 
the National Council assembled. The person having the 
highest number of votes shall be Principal Chief; but if two 
or more shall be equal and highest in votes, one of them shall 

be chosen by joint vote of both branches of the Council. The 
manner of determining contested elections shall be directed 
by law.

Sec. 2. No person except a natural born citizen shall be 
eligible to the office of Principal Chief; neither shall any per
son be eligible to that office who shall not have attained to 
the age of thirty-five years.

Sec. 3. There shall also be chosen at the same time by the 
qualified electors in the-same manner for four years, an assist
ant Principal Chief, who shall have attained to the age of thir
ty-five years.

Sec. 4. In case of the removal of the Principal Chief from 
office, or of his death or resignation, or inability to discharge 
the powers and duties of the said office, the same shall devolve 
on the assistant Principal Chief until the disability be removed 
or the vacancy filled by the National Council.

Sec. 5. The National Council may by law provide for the 
case of removal, death, resignation, or disability of both the 
Principal and assistant Principal Chief, declaring what officer 
shall then act as Principal Chief until the disability be remov
ed or a Principal Chief shall be elected.

Sec. 6. The Principal Chief and assistant Principal Chief 
shall, at stated times, receive for their services a compensation 
which shall neither be increased nor diminished during the 
period for which they shall have been elected; and they shall 
not receive within that period any other emolument from the 
Cherokee Nation or any other Government.

Sec. 7. Before the Principal Chief enters on the execution 

of his office, he shall take the following oath or affirmation:

“I do solemnly swear, or affirm, that I will faithfully exe
cute the duties of Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, 
and will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect, and de
fend the Constitution of the Cherokee Nation.”

Sec. 8. He may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the 

National Council at the seat of Government.

Sec. 9. He shall from time to time, give to the National 
Council information of the state of the Government, and re
commend to their consideration such measures as he may deem 
expedient.

Sec. 10. He shall take care that the laws be faithfully ex

ecuted.

Sec. 11. It shall be his duty to visit the different Districts

at least once in two years, to inform himself of the general 
condition of the country.

Sec. 12. The assistant Principal Chief shall, by virtue of 
his office, aid and advise the Principal Chief in the adminis
tration of the government at all times during his continuance 
in office.

Sec. 13. Vacancies that may occur in offices, the appoint
ment of which is vested in the National Council, shall be fill
ed by the Principal Chief, during the recess of the National 
Council, by granting commissions which shall expire at the 
end of the next session thereof.

Sec. 14. Every bill which shall pass both branches of the 
National Council shall, before it becomes a law, be presented 
to the Principal Chief; if he approve, he shall sign it, but if 
not, he shall return it, with his objections, to that branch in 
which it may have originated, Who shall enter the objections 
at large on their journals, and proceed to reconsider it; if, af
ter such reconsideration, two-thirds of that branch shall agree 
to pass the bill, it shall be sent, together with the objections, 
to the other branch, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered, 
and if approved by two-thirds of that branch, it shall become 
a law. If any bill shall not be returned by the Principal Chief 
within five days, (Sundays excepted,) after the same has been 
presented to him, it shall become a law, in like manner as if 
he had signed it, unless the National Council, by their ad
journment, prevent its return, in which case it shall be a law, 
unless sent back within three days after their next meeting.

Sec. 15. Members of the National Council, and all offi
cers, Executive and Judicial, shall be bound by oath to sup
port the Constitution of this Nation, and to perform the duties 
of their respective offices with fidelity.

Sec. 16. In case of disagreement between the two branches 
of the National Council, with respect to the time of adjourn
ment, the Principal Chief shall have power io adjourn the 
same to such a time as lie may deem proper; provided it be 
not a period beyond the next constitutional meeting thereof.
Sec. 17. The Principal Chief shall, during the session of 

the National Council, attend at the seat of Government.

Sec. 18. There shall be a council composed of five persons 
to be appointed by the National Council, whom the Principal 
Chief shall have full power at his discretion to assemble; he, 
together with the assistant Principal Chief, and the counsel

lots, or a majority of them, may, from time to time, hold and 
keep a Council for ordering and directing the affairs of the 
Nation according to law; provided the National Council shall 
have power to reduce the number, if deemed expedient, after 
the first term of service, to a number not less than three.

Sec. 19. The members of the executive Council shall be 

chosen for the term of two years.

Sec. 20. The resolutions and advice of the Council shall 
be recorded in a register, and signed by the members agree
ing thereto, which may be called for by either branch of the 
National Council, and any counsellor may enter his dissent 
to the majority.

Sec. 21. The Treasurer of the Cherokee Nation shall be 
chosen by a joint vote of both branches of the National Coun
cil for the term of four years.

Sec. 22. The Treasurer shall, before entering on the du
ties of his office, give bond to the Nation, with sureties to the 
satisfaction of the National Council, for the faitful discharge 
of his trust.

Sec. 23. No money shall be drawn from the Treasury but 
by warrant from the Principal Chief, and in consequence of 
appropriations made by law.

Sec. 24. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to receive 
all public moneys, and to make a regular statement and ac
count of the receipts and expenditures of all public moneys at 
the annual session of the National Council.

Article V.

Sec. 1. The Judicial powers shall be vested in a Supreme 
Court, and such Circuit and inferior Courts as the National 
Council may, from time to time, ordain and establish.

Sec. 2. The Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts 
shall hold their commissions for the term of four years, but any 
of them may be removed from office on the address of two- 
thirds of each branch of the National Council to the Princi
pal Chief, for that purpose.

Sec. 3. The Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts 
shall, at stated times, receive a compensation which shall not 
be diminished during their continuance in office; but they 
shall receive no fees or perquisites of office, nor hold any oth
er office of profit or trust under the Government of this Na
tion or any other Power.

Sec. 4. No person shall be appointed a Judge of any of the 
Courts until he shall have attained to the age of thirty years.
Sec. 5. The Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts 
shall be elected by the National Council, and there shall be 
appointed in each District as many Justices of the Peace as it 
 may be deemed expedient for the public good, whose powers, 
duties and duration in office, shall be clearly designated by Jaw.
Sec. 6. The Judges of the Supreme Court and of the Cir
cuit Courts shall have complete criminal jurisdiction in such 
cases and in such manner as may be pointed out by law.

Sec. 7. No Judge shalls it on triad of any cause when the 
parties are connected by affinity or consanguinity, except by 
consent of the parties.

In case all the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be in
terested in the issue of any cause, or related to all or either 
of the parties, the National Council may provide by law for 
the selection of a suitable number of persons of good charac
ter and knowledge for the determination thereof, and who 
shall be specially commissioned for the adjudication of such- 
case by the Principal Chief.

Sec. 8. All writs and other process shall run “in the name - 
of the Cherokee Nation," and bear test, and be signed by the 
respective Clerks.

Sec. 9. Indictments shall conclude—“Against the peace 

and dignity of the Cherokee Nation.”

Sec. 10. The Supreme Court shall, after the present year, 
hold its session annually at the seat of Government, to be 
convened on the first Monday of October, in each year.

Sec. 11. In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall 
have the right of being heard; of demanding the nature and 
cause of the accusation; of meeting the witnesses face to face; 
of having compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his. 
or their favor; and in prosecutions by indictment or informa
tion, a Speedy public trial, by an impartial jury of the vicin
age; nor shall the accused be compelled to give evidence 
against himself.

Sec. 12. The people shall be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and possessions, from unreasonable seizures 
and searches, and no warrant to search any place, or to seize 
any person or things, shall issue without describing them as 
nearly as may be, nor without good cause supported by oath 
or affirmation.

Sec. 13. All persons shall be bailable by sufficient secu
rities, unless for capital offences, where the proof is evident, 
or presumption great.

Article VI.

Sec. 1. No person who denies the being of a God, or a 
future state of reward and punishment, shall hold any office 
in the civil department in this Nation.

Sec. 2. The free exercise of religious worship, and serv
ing God without distinction, shall, forever, be enjoyed within 
the limits of this Nation: provided, that this liberty of con
science shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of licen
tiousness, or justify practices inconsistent with the peace or 
safety of this Nation.

Sec. 3. When the National Council shall determine the 
expediency of appointing delegates, or other public agents, 
for the purpose of transacting business with the Government 
of the United States, the Principal Chief shall recommend, 
arid, by the advice and consent of the National Committee, 
appoint and commission such delegates or public agents ac
cordingly. On all matters of interest, touching the rights of 
the citizens of this Nation, which may require the attention 
of the United States Government, the Principal Chief shall 
keep tip a friendly correspondence with that Government, 
through the medium of its proper officers.

Sec. 4. All commissions shall be “in the name, and by the 
authority of the Cherokee Nation;” and be sealed with the 
seal of the Nation, and signed by the Principal Chief. The 
Principal Chief shall make use of his private seal until a Na
tional seal shall be provided.

Sec. 5. A Sheriff shall be elected in each District, by the 
qualified electors thereof, who shall hold his office two years, 
unless sooner removed. Should a vacancy occur, subsequent 
to an election, it shall be filled by the Principal Chief, as in 
other cases; and the person so appointed, shall continue in 
office until the next regular election.

Sec. 6. No person shall for the same offence be twice 
put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall the property of any 
person be taken and applied to public use without a just and 
fair compensation: Provided, That nothing in this clause shall 
be so Construed as to impair the right and power of the Na
tional Council to lay and collect taxes.
 
 

 
 
 Sec. 7. The right of trial by jury, shall remain inviolate, 
and every person, for injury sustained in person, property or 
reputation, shall have remedy by due course of law.

Sec. 8. The appointment of all officers, not otherwise di
rected by this Constitution, shall be vested in the National 
Council.

Sec. 9. Religion, morality, and knowledge, being neces
sary to good government, the preservation of liberty, and the 
happiness of mankind, schools, and the means of education, 
shall forever be encouraged in this Nation.

Sec. 10. The National Council may propose such amend
ments to this Constitution, as two-thirds of each branch may 
deem expedient; and the Principal Chief shall issue a pro
clamation, directing all civil officers of the several Districts 
to promulgate the same as extensively as possible within their 
respective Districts, at least six months previous to the next 
general election. And if, at the first session of the National 
Council, after such general election, two-thirds of each branch 
shall, by ayes and noes, ratify such proposed amendments, 
they shall be valid to all intent and purposes, as parts of this 
Constitution: Provided, That such proposed amendments 
shall be read on three several days in each branch, as well 
when the same are proposed, as when they are ratified.

Done in Convention at Tahlequah, Cherokee Nation, this 

sixth day of September, 1839.
 
 

GEORGE LOWREY, 

 
 President of the National Convention.

