 
  
 The Library of Congress’ 
 

EARLY STATE RECORDS PROJECT

 
 converted from the original microfilm held by the
Vincent C. Immel Law Library, Saint Louis University

through the generous support of the following institutions

University of Chicago, D'Angelo Law Library

Columbia University, Arthur W. Diamond Law Library

Cornell University, Law Library

Law Library of Congress

University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, Kathrine R. Everett Law Library

St. John's University, Rittenberg Law Library

University of South Carolina, Coleman Karesh Law Library

Stanford University, Robert Crown Law Library

State University of New York at Buffalo, Charles B. Sears Law Library

Yale University, Lillian Goldman Law Library

Boston University, Fineman and Pappas Law Libraries

Shared contribution by libraries at the following Florida institutions:

University of Florida 
University of South Florida 
University of West Florida 
Florida Gulf Coast University University of Central Florida
University of North Florida 
Northwest Florida State College Florida Polytechnic University

University of Miami
Florida State University
Florida A&M University

Rollins College

Shared contribution by law libraries at the following Virginia institutions:

The College of William & Mary, Wolf Law Library
University of Richmond Law Library
University of Virginia, Arthur J Morris Law Library

Contribution by law library at the following Maine institution:

Maine State Law and Legislative Reference Library, Maine State Legislature


CONSTITUTION

OF THE

CHEROKEE NATION,

MADE AND ESTABLISHED

AT A

GENERAL CONVENTION OF DELEGATES,

DULY AUTHORISED FOR THAT PURPOSE,

AT

NEW 

ECHOTA,


 
 JULY 26, 1827. 
 

PRINTED FOR THE CHEROKEE NATION, 
AT THE OFFICE OF THE STATESMAN AND PATRIOT,

GEORGIA 


CONSTITUTION.

WE, THE REPRESENTATIVES of the peo
ple of the Cherokee Nation in Convention assem
bled, in order to establish justice, ensure tranquility, pro
mote our common welfare, and secure to ourselves and 
our posterity the blessings of liberty ; acknowledging 
with humility and gratitude the goodness of the sover
eign Ruler of the Universe, in offering us an opportuni
ty so favorable to the design, and imploring his aid and 
direction in its accomplishment, do ordain and estab
lish this Constitution for the Government of the Chero
kee Nation.

ARTICLE I.

Sec. 1. THE BOUNDARIES of this nation, em
bracing the lands solemnly guaranteed and reser
ved forever to the Cherokee Nation by the Trea
ties concluded with the United States, are as fol
lows ; and which shall forever hereafter remain, 
unalternately the same—to wit—Beginning on the 
North Bank of Tennessee River at the upper 
part of the Chickesaw old fields ; thence along the 
main channel of said river, including a11 the islands 
therein to the mouth of the Hiwassee river, thence up 
the main channel of said river, including Islands to the 
first hill which closes in on said river, about two miles 
above Hiwassee old Town ; thence along the ridge 
which divides the waters of the Hiwassee and little Tel
lico, to the Tennessee river at Tallassee ; thence a
long the main channel, including Islands to the junc
tion of the Cowee and Nanteyalee ; thence along the 
ridge in the fork of said river, to the top of the blue 
ridge; thence along the blue ridge to the Unicoy Turn
pike road; thence by a straight line to the nearest main 
source of the Chestatee, thence along its main chan
nel, including Islands, to the Chattahoochy; and thence 
down the same, to the Creek boundary at Buzzard 
Roost ; thence along the boundary line which seperates 
this and the Creek Nation, to a point on the Coosa ri
 
 

CONSTITUTION 

 
 .4

ver opposite the mouth of Wills Creek, thence down 
along the South bank of the same to a point opposite 
to Fort Strother; thence up the river to the mouth of 
Wills Creek; thence up along the East bank of said 
creek, to the West branch thereof, and up the same to
its source; and thence along the ridge which separates 
the Tombecbee and Tennessee waters, to a point on 
the top of said ridge; thence a due North course to 
Camp Coffee on Tennessee river, which is opposite the 
Chickesaw Island; thence to the place of beginning.
Sec. 2. The sovereignty and jurisdiction of this 
 Government shall extend over the Country within the 
boundaries above described, and the lands therein, are 
and shall remain, the common property of the Nation ;
 but the improvements made thereon, and in the posses
sion of the citizens of the Nation, are the exclusive 
 and indefeasible property of the citizens respectively 
 who made, or may rightfully be in possession of them ; 
 Provided, That the citizens of the Nation, possessing 
 exclusive and indefeasible right to their respective im
provements, as expressed in this article, shall possess 
 no right nor power to dispose of their improvements 
 in any manner whatever to the United States, individu
al States, nor to individual citizens thereof; and that 
 whenever any such citizen or citizens shall remove with 
their effects out of the limits of this Nation, and be
 come citizens of any another Government, all their 
rights and privileges as citizens of this Nation shall 
cease; Provided nevertheless, The Legislature shall have 
power to re-admit by law all the right of citizenship to 
any such person or persons who may at any time desire
to return to the Nation by memoriarizing the General 
Council for such readmission. Moreover, the Legisla
ture shall have power to adopt such laws and regula
tions as its wisdom may deem expedient and proper to 
prevent the citizens from monopolizing improvements, 
with the view of speculations.

ARTICLE II.

Sec. 1. THE POWER of this Government shall 
be divided into three district Departments ; the Le
gislative, Executive, and the Judicial,

SEC. 2. No person or persons, belonging to one of 
these Departments, shall exercise any of the powers 
properly belonging to either of the others, except in 
the cases hereinafter expressly directed or permitted.

ARTICLE III.
Sec. 1. THE LEGISLATIVE POWER shall be 
vested in two distinct branches a committee and a coun
cil ; each to have a negative on the other, and both to 
be styled, the General council of the Cherokee Na
tion, and the style of their acts and laws shall be,

"Resolved by the Committee and Council in Gen

eral Council convened"

Sec. 2. The Cherokee Nation, as laid off into tight 

Districts shall remain so.

Sec. 3. The Committee shall consist of two mem
bers from each District,and the Council shall consist of 
three members from each District, to be chosen by the 
qualified electors of their respective Districts for two 
years ; and the elections to be held in every District on 
the first Monday in August for the year 1828, and every 
succeeding two years thereafter ; and the General 
Council shall be held once a year to be convened on 
the second Monday of October in each year, at New 
Echota.

No person shall be eligible to a seat in the General 
Council but a free Cherokee Male citizen, who shall 
have attained to the age of twenty-five years ; the de
scendants of Cherokee men by all free women, except 
the African race, whose parents may be or have been 
living together as man and wife, according to the cus
toms and laws of this Nation, shall be entitled to all 
the rights and privileges of this Nation, as well as the 
posterity of Cherokee women by all free men. No

person who is of a negro or mulatto parentage, either 
by the Father or Mother side, shall be eligible to hold 
any once of profit, honor or trust, under this Govern
ment.

The Electors, and members to the General Council, 
shall in all cases except in those of treason, felony, or 
breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during 
their attendance at election, and the General Coun
cil, and in going to, and returning from, the same.

In all elections by the people, the electors shall vote
viva voce. Elections for members to the General 
Council for 1828, shall be held at the places of holding 
their several courts, and at the other two precincts in 
each District which are designated by the law under 
which the members of this Convention were elected, 
and that the District Judges shall superintend the elec
tions within the precinct of their respective Court 
Houses, and the Marshals and Sheriffs to superintend 
the precincts which may be assigned them by the Cir
cuit Judge of their respective Districts, together with 
one other person who shall be apppointed by the Cir
cuit Judges for each precinct within the Districts of 
their respective precincts; and the Circuit Judges 
shall also appoint a clerk to each precinct. The su
perintendents and clerks shall, on the Wednesday mor
ning preceding the election, assemble at their respec
tive Court Houses and proceed to examine and ascer
tain the true state of the polls, and shall issue to each 
member, duly elected, a certificate; and also make an 
official return of the state of the polls of election to 
the principal Chief, and it shall be the duty of the Sher
iffs to deliver the same to the Executive Office; Pro
vided nevertheless, The General Council shall have pow
er, alter the elections of 1828, to regulate by law, the 
precincts and superintendants and clerks of elections 
in the several Districts.

Sec. 4. All free Male citizens, (excepting negroes, 

and descendants of white and Indian men by negro

women, who may have been set free,) who shall have 
attained to the age of eighteen years, shall be equally 
entitled to vote at all public elections.

Sec. 5. Each House of the General Council shall 
judge of the qualifications, elections, and returns, of its 
own members.

Sec. 6. Each House of the General Council may 
determine the rules of its proceedings, punish a mem
ber for disorderly behaviour, and with the concurrence 
of two thirds, expel a member; but not a second time 
for the same cause.

Sec. 7. Each House of the General Council, when 
assembled, shall choose its own officers; a majority of 
each house shall constitute a quorum to do business, but 
a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and 
compel the attendance of absent members in such 
manner and under such penalty, as each house may 
prescribe.

Sec. 8. The members of the Committee shall each 
receive from the public Treasury a compensation for 
their services, which shall be Two Dollars and Fifty 
cents per day, during their attendance at the General 
Council, and the members of the Council shall each 
receive Two Dollars per day, for their services during 
their attendance at the General Council:-Provided, 
That the same may be increased or diminished by law, 
but no alteration shall take effect during the period of 
service of the members of the General Council, by 
whom such alteration shal1 have been made.

SEC. 9. The General Council shall regulate by law, 
by whom and in what manner, writs of elections shall 
be issued to fill the vacancies which may happen in ei
ther branch thereof.

Sec. 10. Each member of the General Council, be
fore he takes his seat, shall take the following oath, or 
affirmation, to wit: “I A. B. do solemnly swear (or 
affirm as the case may be) that I have not obtained my 
election by Bribery, Treats, or any undue and unlaw

ful means used by myself, or others by my desire, or 
approbation, for that purpose; that I consider myself 
Constitutionally qualified as a member of
and that, on all questions and measures which may come 
before me, I will give my vote, and so conduct myself 
as may, in my judgment, appear most conducive to 
the interest and prosperity of this Nation ; and that I 
will bear true faith and allegiance to the same, and to 
the utmost of my ability and power observe, conform 
to, support, and defend the Constitution thereof."-

Sec. 11. No person who may be convicted of felo
ny before any court of this Nation, shall be eligible to 
any office or appointment of honor, profit or trust, with
in this Nation.

Sec. 12. The General Council shall have power to 
make all laws and regulations, which they shall deem 
necessary and proper for the good of the Nation, which 
shall not be contrary to this Constitution.

Sec. 13. It shall be the duty of the General Coun
cil to pass such laws as may be necessary and proper to 
decide differences by arbitrators to be appointed by the 
parties who may choose that summary mode of adjust
ment

Sec. 14. No power of suspending the laws of this 
Nation shall be exercised unless by the legislature on 
its authority.

Sec. 15. That no retrospective law, nor any law, 

impairing the obligations of contracts shall be passed.

Sec. 16. The Legislature shall have power to make 
laws for laying and collecting taxes, for the purpose of 
raising a revenue.
 Sec. 17. All bills making appropriations shall orig
inate in the Committee, but the Council may propose 
amendments or reject the same.

Sec. 18. All other bills may originate in either house, 
subject to the concurrence or rejection of the other.
Sec. 19. All acknowledged Treaties shall be the

Supreme law of the land.

Sec. 20. The General Council shall have the sole 
power of deciding on the Constitution of all Treaty 
speculations.
 Sec. 21. The Council shall have the sole power of 
impeaching.

Sec. 22. All impeachments shall be tried by the 
committee, when sitting for that purpose;—the mem
bers shall be upon oath or affirmation ; no person shall 
be convicted without the concurrence of two thirds of 
the members present.

Sec. 23. The Principal Chiefs assistant principal 
Chief, and all civil officers, under this nation, shall be 
liable to impeachment for any misdemeanor in office ; 
But Judgment, in such cases, shall not extend further 
than removal from office, and disqualification to hold 
any office of honor, trust or profit, under this Nation. 
The party whether convicted or acquitted, shall, never
theless, be liable to indictment, trials, judgment, and 
punishment, according to law.
 
 

ARTICLE

 
 Sec. 1. The Supreme Executive Power of this Na- 
tion, shall be vested in a Principal Chief, who shall be 
chosen by the General Council, and shall hold his of
fice four years ; to be elected as follows,—The Gen
eral Council, by a joint vote, shall, at their second an
nual session, after the rising of this Convention, and at 
every fourth annual session thereafter, on the second 
day after the two Houses, shall be organized and com
petent, to proceed to business, elect a Principal Chief.
No person except a natural born citizen shall be eli
gible to the office of Principal Chief; neither shall any 
person be eligible to that office, who shall not have at
tained to the age of thirty-five years. 

There shall also be chosen at the same time, by the 
General Council in the same manner, for four years, 
an assistant Principal Chief.

In case of the removal of the Principal Chief from

office, or of 
his death, resignation, or inability to dis
charge the powers and duties of the said office, the 
same shall devolve on the assistant principal Chief, un
til the inability be removed, or vacancy filled, by the

General 
Council.

Sec. 2. The General Council may, by law, provide 
for the case of removal, death, resignation or inability 
both of the Principal and assistant Principal Chiefs 
declaring what officer shall then act as Principal Chief, 
until the disability be removed, or a Principal Chief 
shall be elected.

 Sec. 3. The Principal Chief, and assistant Princi
pal Chief, shall, at stated times, receive for their servi
ces, a compensation which shall neither be increased 
 nor diminished during the period for which they shall 
have been elected, and they shall not receive, within 
that period, any other emolument from the Cherokee 
Nation, or any other power.

Sec. 4. Before the Principal Chief enter on the 
execution of his office, he shall take the following oath, 
or affirmation; I do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I 
will faithfully execute the office of Principal Chief of 
the Cherokee Nation, and will, to the best of my abili
ty preserve, protect, and defend, the Constitution of 
the Cherokee Nation."

Sec. 5. He may, on extraordinary occasions, con
vene the General Council at the Seat of Government, 
he shall from time to time, give to General Council in
formation of the State of the Government, and recom
mend to their consideration such measures as he may 
think expedient. He shall take care that the laws be 
faithfully executed. It shall be his duty to visit the dif
ferent districts, at least once in two years, to inform 
himself of the General Constitution of the Country."
Sec. 6. The assistant Principal Chief shall, by vir
tue of his office, aid and advise the Principal Chief in 
the Administration of the Government, at all times du
ring his continuance in office.—

7. Vacancies that may happen in offices, the
Sec. 

appointment of which is vested in the General Coun
cil, shall be filled by the Principal Chief, during the re
cess of the General Council, by granting Commissions 
which shall expire at the end of the next Session.
Sec. 8. Every Bill which shall have passed both 
Houses of the General Council shall, before it be
comes a law, be presented to the Principal Chief of the 
Cherokee Nation. If he approve, be shall sign it, but 
if not, he shall return it, with his objections, to that 
house in which it shall have originated, who shall enter 
the objections at large on their journals, and proceed to 
reconsider it. If after such reconsideration, two thirds 
of that House shall agree to pass the lull, it shall be sent 
together with the objections, to the other house, by 
which it shall likewise be reconsidered, and if approved 
by two thirds of that house, it shall become a law. If 
any bill shall not be returned by the Principal Chief 
within five days (Sunday’s excepted) after it shall have 
been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in like 
manner as if be had signed it ; unless the General 
Council by their adjournment prevent its return, in 
which case it shall be a law, unless sent back within 
three days after their next meeting; members of the 
General Council and all officers, Executive and Judi
cial, shall be bound by oath, to support the Constitution 
of this Nation, and to perform the duties of their res
pective offices, with fidelity. 

Sec. 9. In case of disagreement between the two hou
ses with respect to the time of adjournment, the Princi
pal Chief shall have power to adjourn the General 
Council to such a time as he thinks proper, provided, 
it be not to a period beyond the next Constitutional 
meeting of the same.

Sec. 10. The Principal Chief, shall, during the sit
ting of the General Council, attend at the Seat of Gov
ernment.

Sec. 11. There shall be a Council to consist of three 
men to be appointed by the joint vote of both Houses, 
to advise the Principal Chief in the Executive part of

the Government, whom the Principal Chief shall have 
full power, at his discretion, to assemble; and he, to
gether with the asssistant Principal Chief, and the 
Counsellors, or a majority of them, may, from time to 
time, hold and keep a Council for ordering and direc
ting the affairs of the Nation according to law.

Sec. 12. The members of the Council shall be 

chosen for the term of

Sec. 13. The resolutions and advice of the Coun
cil shall be recorded in a register, and signed by the 
members agreeing thereto, which may be called for by 
either house of the General Council, and any counsellor 
may enter his dessent to the resolution of the majority.

Sec. 14. The Treasurer of the Cherokee Nation 
shall be chosen by the joint vote of each House of the 
General Council for the term of two years.

Sec. 15. The Treasurer shall, before entering on 
the duties of his office, give bond to the Nation with 
sureties to the satisfaction of the Legislature, for the 
faithful discharge of his trust.

Sec. 16. No money shall be drawn from the Trea
sury, but by warrant from the Principal Chief, and 
in consequence of appropriations made by law.

Sec. 17. It shall be the duty of the Treasurer to 
receive all public moneys and to make a regular state
ment and account, of the receipts and expenditure of 
all public moneys to the annual Session of the General 
ARTICLE I.
Council. 

The Judicial Powers shall be vested in a Supreme 
Court, and such Circuit and Inferior courts as the Gen
eral Council may, from time to time, ordain and establ
ish. 

ARTICLE II.
The Supreme Court shall consist of three Judges; 

any two of whom shall be a quorum.

ARTICLE 111. 

The Judges of each shall hold their Commissions 
four years , but any of them may be removed from of
fice on the address of two thirds of each house of the 
General Council to the Principal Chief, forthat purpose.

ARTICLE IV.
The Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts 
shall, at stated times, receive a compensation which 
shall not be diminished during their continuance in of
fice, but they shall receive no fees or perquisites of of
fice, nor, hold any other office of profit or trust, under 
this Nation or any other power.

ARTICLE V.

No person shall be appointed a Judge of any of the 
Courts before he shall have attained to the age of thirty 
years, nor shall any person continue to execute the du
ties of any of the said offices after he shall have attain
ed to the age of seventv years.

ARTICLE VI.

The Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts shall 
be appointed by a joint vote of each house of the Gen
eral Council. 

  ARTICLE VII.

There shall be appointed in each District, under the 
Legislative authority, as many Justices of the Peace as 
may be deemed the public good require, and whose 
powers, duties and duration in office, shall be clearly 
designated. 

ARTICLE VIII.

The Judges of the Supreme Court and Circuit 
Courts shall have complete criminal jurisdiction in 
such cases and in such manner as may be pointed out 
by law. 

ARTICLE IX.

Each Court shall choose its own Clerks for the 

term of four years but such Clerks shall not be contin
ued in office unless their qualifications shall be adjudged 
and approved of, by the Judges of the Supreme Court, 
and they shall be removable for breach of good be
haviour at any time, by the Judges of their respective 
courts. 

ARTICLE X.
No Judge shall sit on the trial of any cause, where 
the parties shall be connected with him, by affinity or  
consanguinity, except by consent of the parties. In 
case all the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be en
trusted in the event of any cause, or related to all, or 
either, of the parties, the Legislature may provide by

law for the selection of three men, of good character 
and knowledge, for the determination thereof who 
shall be specially commissioned by the Principal Chief 
for the case. 

ARTICLE XI.
All writs and other process shall run, in the name of 
the Cherokee Nation, and bear test, and be signed by 
the respective clerks.

ARTICLE XII.

Indictments shall conclude,against the peace and dig

nity of the Cherokee Nation.

ARTICLE XIII.

The Supreme Court shall hold its Session annually 
at the Seat of Government to be convened on the se
cond Monday of October in each year

 ARTICLE XIV.

In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall have 
the right of being heard, of demanding the nature and 
cause of the accusation against him, of meeting the 
witness face to face, of having compulsory process for 
attaining witness in his favour; and in prosecutions by 
indictment or information, a speedy public trial by an 
impartial jury of the vicinage ; nor shall he be com
pelled to give evidence against himself.

ARTICLE XV.

That the people shall be secure in their persons, hou
ses, papers and possessions from unreasonable seisures 
and searches, and that no warrant to search any place 
or to seize any person or things, shall issue without 
describing them as nearly as may be, without good 
cause, supported by oath or affirmation ; all prisoners 
shall be bailable by sufficient securities, unless for capi
tal offences, where the proof evident, or presumption 
great. 

ARTICLE XVI.
Whereas the ministers of the Gospel are, by their 
profession, dedicated to the service of God—and the 
care of. souls, and ought not to be diverted from the 
great duty of their function, therefore, no minister of 
the Gospel; or public preacher, of any religious per
suation, whilst he continues in the exercise of his pas

toral functions, shall be eligible to the office of Princi
pal Chief, or a Seat in either house of the General 
Council. 

ARTICLE XVII.
No person who denies the being of God, or a future 
state of rewards and punisments, shall hold any office 
in the civil department of this Nation.
ARTICLE XVIll.

The free exercise of religious worship, and serving 
God without distinction, shall forever be allowed with
in this Nation : Provided, That this liberty of con
science shall not be so construed as to excuse acts of 
licentiousness or justify practices inconsistent with the 
peace or safety of this Nation.

ARTICLE XIX.

Whenever the General Council shall determine the 
expediency of appointing delegates or other public 
Agents for that purpose of transacting business with 
the Government of the United States ; the Principal 
Chief shall have power to recommend, and by the ad
vice and consent of the Committee, shall appoint and 
commission such delegates or Public Agents according
ly; and on all matters of interest touching the rights of 
the citizens of this Nation which may require the at
tention of the United States Government, the Principal 
Chief shall keep up a friendly correspondence 
that Government thro' the medium of its proper offi
cers. 
ARTICLE XX.
All commissions shall be in the name and by the au
thority of the Cherokee Nation, and be sealed with the 
seal of the Nation, and be signed by the Principal Chief.
The Principal Chief shall make use of his private 

seal until a National seal shall be provided.

ARTICLE XXI.

A Sheriff shall be elected in each District by the 
qualified electors thereof, who shall hold his office for 
the term of two years, unless sooner removed. Should 
a vacancy occur subsequent to an election, it shall be 
filled by the Principal Chief as in other cases, and the 
person so appointed shall continue in office until the

next General election, when such vacancy shall be fil
led by the qualified electors, and the Sheiff then elec
ted shall continue in office for two years. 

 ARTICLE XXII.

There shall be a marshall appointed by a joint vote of 
both houses of the General Council for the term of four 
years, whose compensation and duties shall be regula
ted by law and whose jurisdiction shall extend over the 
Cherokee Nation. 

ARTICLE XXIII.
No person shall for the same offence be twice put in 
jeopardy of life or limb, nor shall any persons proper
ty be taken or applied to public use without his consent; 
Provided, That nothing shall be so construed in this 
clause to impair the right and power of the General 
Council to lay and collect Taxes; that all courts shall 
be open and every person for an injury done him in his 
property person or reputation, shall have remedy by 
due course of Law.
 
  
  
 

ARTICLE

 
 The right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate.

_  
 

ARTICLE
 
 Religion, morality and knowledge, being necessary 
to good Government, the preservation of liberty and 
the happiness of mankind, Schools and the means of 
education shall forever be encouraged in this Nation.
 
 

ARTICLE
 
 The appointment of all officers, not otherwise direc
ted by this Constitution, shall be vested in the legisla
ture. 
 
 
ARTICLE

 
 All laws in force in this Nation, at the passing of 
this Constitution, shall so continue until altered or re
pealed by the legislature, except where they are tempo
rary, in which case they shall expire at the times res
pectively limited for their duration; if not continued 
by act of the legislature.
 
 

ARTICLE
 
 The General Council may at any time propose such 
amendments to this Constitution as two thirds of each
 
 

 
 
 
 
 house shall deem expedient; and the Principal Chief 
shall issue a proclamation, directing all the civil officers 
of the several Districts to promulgate the same as ex
tensively as possible within their respective districts, at 
least nine months previous to the next General election, 
and if at the first session of the General Council, after 
such General election, two thirds of each house shall, 
by yeas and nays ratify such proposed amendments, 
they shall be valied to all intents and purposes parts 
of this Constitution; Provided, That such proposed 
amendment shall be read on three several days, in each 
house, as well when the same are proposed, as when 
they are finally ratified, 

Done in Convention at New Echota this twenty-sixth 
day of July in the year of our Lord one thousand eight 
hundred and twenty seven; In testimony whereof, we 
have, each of us, hereunto subscribed our names.

  JNO. ROSS, President Convention, and Delegate from 

Chickamauga. 

'

JOHN BALDRIDGE, his x mark.

' SRSowS7EV’ !^tesof Chattooga 

EDWARD GUNTER ) oisinct.

KELECHULEE,’his s mart. ) 

* t ‘

Delegates of Coosj;wa. 

 Seman, 
HAIR CONRAD, Ms x ma<? J !• 

AmohCe

K3lS; | of Hickoryly District.’ 
■ -
 
 
JOSEPH VANN, 
 
 THOMAS PETITT, his x mark. 
JOHN BEAMER, his x mark,

)^hsates of Etowa

.

OOCLENOTA, his x mark* ) Delegates of Taquoe

, WM. BALING, his x mark. J District.

i JOHN TIMSON, 

SlTtJWAREE, his x mark. 

) Delegates of
? Aquobee

• RICHARD WALKER, his x mark. J * District.

A. M’CQY, Secretary to C(

