 
  
 Constitution 
of the 
Cherokee Nation 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the People of the Cherokee Nation, in order to preserve our sovereignty, enrich our 
culture, achieve and maintain a desirable measure of prosperity and the blessings of freedom, 
acknowledging with humility and gratitude the goodness, aid and guidance of the Sovereign 
Ruler of the Universe in permitting us to do so, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the 
government of the Cherokee Nation.

Article I. Federal Relationship

The Cherokee Nation reaffirms its sovereignty and mutually beneficial relationship with 

the United States of America.

Article II. Territorial Jurisdiction

The boundaries of the Cherokee Nation territory shall be those described by the patents of 

1838 and 1846 diminished only by the Treaty of July 19, 1866, and the Act of March 3, 1893.

Article III. Bill of Rights

The People of the Cherokee Nation shall have and do affirm the following rights:

Section 1. The judicial process of the Cherokee Nation shall be open to every person and 
entity within the jurisdiction of the Cherokee Nation. Speedy and certain remedy, and equal 
protection, shall be afforded under the laws of the Cherokee Nation.

Section 2.  In all criminal proceedings, the accused shall have the right to: counsel; 
confront all adverse witnesses; have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in favor of the 
accused; and, to a speedy public trial by an impartial jury. The accused shall have the privilege 
against self-incrimination; and the Cherokee Nation shall not twice try or punish an accused for 
the same offense. Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel and 
unusual punishment inflicted.

Section 3. The right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate, and the Cherokee Nation shall 
not deprive any person of life, liberty or property without due process of law, nor shall private 
property be taken for public use without just compensation.

Section 4.  The Council shall make no law prohibiting the free exercise of religion or 
abridging the freedom of speech, or the press, or the right of the People to peaceably assemble, 
or to petition the Nation for a redress of grievances.

Article IV. Citizenship

Section 1. All citizens of the Cherokee Nation must be original enrollees or descendants 
of original enrollees listed on the Dawes Commission Rolls, including the Delaware Cherokees 
of Article II of the Delaware Agreement dated the 8th day of May, 1867, and the Shawnee 
Cherokees of Article III of the Shawnee Agreement dated the 9th day of June, 1869, and/or their 
descendants.

The Cherokee Nation recognizes the basic rights retained by all distinct People and 
groups affiliated with the Cherokee Nation, retained from time immemorial, to remain a separate 
and distinct People. Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to prohibit the Cherokee- 
Shawnee or Delaware-Cherokee from pursuing their inherent right to govern themselves, 
provided that it does not diminish the boundaries or jurisdiction of the Cherokee Nation or 
conflict with Cherokee law.

Section 2. There shall be established a Cherokee Register, to be kept by the Registrar, for 
the inclusion of any Cherokee for citizenship purposes in the Cherokee Nation who presents the 
necessary evidence of eligibility for registration. The Council may empower the Registrar to 
keep and maintain other vital records.

(a) A Registration Committee shall be established. It shall be the duty of the Registration 
Committee to consider the qualifications and to determine the eligibility of those applying to 
have their names entered in the Cherokee Register. The Registration Committee shall consist of a 
Registrar and two (2) assistants. All members shall be appointed by the Principal Chief and 
confirmed by the Council.

(b)  There shall be a number assigned to every name, which is approved and entered into 
the Cherokee Register. This number shall be preceded by the three words, "Cherokee Registry 
Number."

(c) The decisions of the Registration Committee shall be subject to de novo review by the 

lower courts created by Article VIII.

Section 3. Registration as used in this Article refers to the process of enrolling as a 

citizen of the Cherokee Nation and is not the same as registration for voting purposes.

Article V. Distribution of Powers

The powers of the government of the Cherokee Nation shall be divided into three (3) 
separate branches: Legislative, Executive and Judicial; and except as provided in this 
Constitution, the Legislative, Executive and Judicial branches of government shall be separate 
and distinct and no branch shall exercise the powers properly belonging to either of the others.

Article VI. Legislative

Section 1. The legislature shall consist of one legislative body to be called the Council of 

the Cherokee Nation.

Section 2. The Council shall establish rules for its credentials, decorum, and procedure, 
and shall elect a Speaker and a Deputy Speaker from its own membership to officiate over 
Council meetings. The Speaker may vote in all matters before the Council. The Speaker shall be 
third in line of succession to serve as Acting Principal Chief in case of removal, death, 
resignation or disability of both the Principal Chief and Deputy Principal Chief until the 
disability be removed or a successor shall be elected.

Section 3. The Council shall consist of seventeen (17) members, who are citizens by 
blood of the Cherokee Nation. Any citizen by blood of the Cherokee Nation at least twenty-five 
(25) years of age on that date of the election may be a candidate for the Council. Each Council 
member shall be elected in the general election for a term of four (4) years and until his or her 
successor is duly elected and installed. All Council members shall be limited to two (2) 
consecutive elected terms on the Council. All Council members having served two consecutive 
terms must sit out one (1) term before seeking any seat on the Council.

The Council shall establish representative districts which shall be within the boundaries 
of the Cherokee Nation. Fifteen of these seats shall be apportioned to afford a reasonably equal 
division of citizenship among the districts, and the remaining two shall be elected at-large by 
those registered voters residing outside the boundaries of the Cherokee Nation voting at-large in 
accordance with this section.

The Council members representing districts within the boundaries must be domiciled 
within their district. The Council shall, within sixty (60) days of this Constitution taking effect, 
select the two at-large Council members to serve until the next regularly scheduled election.

All registered voters residing outside the boundaries of the Cherokee Nation, may, at the 
time of the first election to fill at-large Council seats, choose to continue to be registered to vote 
in the district in which they were previously registered. In the absence of making that choice, 
they shall be registered to vote at-large. Notwithstanding the above, citizens under the age of 
twenty-five (25) who reside outside the boundaries and who have not previously registered to 
vote, may make a single choice to register to vote in the district of their choice at the time of 
their first registration, failing which their registration shall be to vote at-large. All citizens age 
twenty-five (25) or older residing outside the boundaries not registered to vote at the time of the 
first election to fill at-large Council seats may only register to vote at-large. Citizens residing 
outside the boundaries who relocate within a district shall be subject to the requirements to vote 
in that district. Those residing within the boundaries must vote within the district of their 
residence.

The Council shall, within one year of this Constitution taking effect, establish a system of 

staggered terms for all seats on the Council to be organized into elections every two years.

Section 4. There shall be at least one regular session of the Council in the calendar year 
which shall convene on the second Monday in each January or at such other date as the Council 
shall determine. No business shall be conducted by the Council unless at least two-thirds (2/3) of 
members thereof regularly qualified shall be in attendance, which number shall constitute a 
quorum. The session may not exceed a maximum of thirty (30) calendar days for pay purposes.

Section 5. Special meetings of the Council may be called: (A) by the Principal Chief, (B) 
by the Deputy Principal Chief when he or she has the full powers of the Principal Chief as 
elsewhere defined, (C) upon written request of fifty-one percent (51%) of the members of the 
Council, or (D) upon the written request of ten percent (10%) of the number of registered voters 
who voted in the last general election of the Cherokee Nation. The purposes of said meeting shall 
be stated in a notice published not less that ten (10) days prior to the meeting, and the Council 
may not consider any other subject not within such purposes. No meetings may convene until 
thirty (30) days have elapsed after the adjournment of a prior session or meeting, unless called 
pursuant to Section 7 of Article VII.

Section 6. All meetings of the Council and of its committees shall be open to the public 
except: (A) when the discussion shall concern employment, retention or discharge of personnel; 
(B) when the question of the moral turpitude of any citizen is discussed; and (C) when the 
decorum of the audience shall prejudice orderly administration of business. In the event that 
consideration of a subject shall take place in executive session, the vote shall take place in an 
open meeting.

Section 7. The Council shall have the power to establish laws which it shall deem 
necessary and proper for the good of the Nation, which shall not be contrary to the provisions of 
this Constitution. The style of all bills shall be: "Be It Enacted By The Cherokee Nation". The 
style of all resolutions shall be "Be It Resolved By The Cherokee Nation".

Section 8. No laws passed by the Council shall have retroactive effect or operation.

Section 9. The Council shall have the power to remove elected and appointed officials in 
the Cherokee Nation and said removal must be conducted in accordance with Article XI of this 
Constitution.

Section 10. Every enactment which shall have been approved by a majority of the 
members in attendance at the Council shall, before it becomes effective be presented to the 
Principal Chief, who may approve the enactment by signing it; if not, the Principal Chief shall 
return it with objections to the Council, which shall enter the objections in the Journal and 
proceed to reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds (2/3) of the entire council shall 
agree to pass the enactment, it shall become fully effective and operational notwithstanding the 
objections of veto of the Principal Chief. In all such cases, the vote of the Council shall be 
determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the members voting shall be entered on the 
Council's Journal. If any enactment shall not be returned by the Principal Chief within five (5) 
days (Sundays and holidays excepted) after it shall have been presented, the same shall be law in 
like manner as if approved by the Principal Chief.

Section 11. The Council shall establish a continuing system of permanent publication for 
all laws of the Cherokee Nation and judicial opinions of the highest appellate court. The system 
shall provide for regular updating, indexing and digesting and shall be of public record at all 
times. The text of all laws, resolutions, judicial opinions and orders, except otherwise protected 
by law, and all other governmental publications, except those by Nation-owned entities, shall be 
in the public domain and free from encumbrances against use by the Citizens. This shall not 
constrain the Nation from copyrighting other aspects of governmental publications, except that 
citizens shall always have license for personal use of the copyrighted work without notice or fee.

Section 12. In accordance with Article 12 of the Treaty with the Cherokees, dated 
November 28, 1785 (Treaty of Hopewell), and Article 7 of the Treaty with the Cherokees dated 
December 29, 1835 (Treaty of New Echota), there shall be created the office of Delegate to the 
United States House of Representatives, appointed by the Principal Chief and confirmed by the 
Council. The Delegate shall be a citizen of the Nation and upon recognition by the United States 
shall be seated in accordance with federal law. The Delegate shall endeavor to participate in 
congressional activities and shall at all times advocate the best interests of the Cherokee People. 
The Delegate shall make regular reports to the Council and Principal Chief on congressional 
activities and administrative matters relating to federal law and policy and shall produce an 
annual report to the Cherokee People.

Section 13. In the case of removal, death, resignation or disability of any of Council 
member, such seat shall be filled by the candidate having the next highest number of votes in that 
district, who is available and willing to serve and whose eligibility is confirmed by the Election 
Commission. In the event no such candidate exists, the Council shall fill the vacated seat in the 
following manner: If a majority of the four-year term remains to be served, the Council shall 
authorize a special election in the district of the vacated seat to be conducted within ninety days; 
if a minority of the four-year term remains to be served, the Council shall elect a replacement 
who would otherwise be qualified to serve from the district of the vacated seat.

Section 14. Members of the Council and all Executive Officers shall be bound by oath, 
provided in Article XIII, to support the Constitutions of the Cherokee Nation and the United 
States of America, do everything within the individual's power to promote the culture, heritage 
and traditions of the Cherokee Nation and to perform the duties of their respective offices.

Article VII. Executive

Section 1. The executive power shall be vested in a Principal Chief, who shall be styled 
"The Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation". The Principal Chief shall hold office for a term of 
four (4) years. No person having been elected to the office of Principal Chief in two (2) 
consecutive elections shall be eligible to file for the office of Principal Chief in the election next 
following his or her second term of office. The Principal Chief shall be elected by the registered 
voters on the same day and in the same manner, except as otherwise provided by this 
Constitution, as they shall respectively vote for members of the Council in the year 2003 and 
every four years thereafter. The Principal Chief shall be elected by a majority of votes. The 
manner of determining contested elections shall be as directed by Cherokee law.

Section 2. The Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation shall be a citizen of the Cherokee 
Nation in accordance with Article IV; shall be domiciled within the boundaries of the Cherokee 
Nation for no less than 270 days immediately preceding the day of general election in which he 
or she seeks election; and, shall have obtained the age of thirty (30) years at the time of his or her 
election and be a citizen by blood of the Cherokee Nation.

Section 3. The registered voters shall elect a Deputy Principal Chief, who shall possess 
the same qualifications as the Principal Chief, for a term of four (4) years at the same time and in 
the same manner as herein provided for the election of the Principal Chief. The Deputy Chief 
shall be subject to the same term limitations as provided for the Principal Chief in this 
Constitution.

Section 4. In case of the absence of the Principal Chief from office due to death, 
resignation, removal or inability to discharge the powers and duties of the office, the same shall 
devolve upon the Deputy Principal Chief for the remaining portion of the four (4) year term to 
which the Principal Chief had been elected. In case of disability, such powers shall continue 
during the term of such disability.

In the event of the death, resignation, or removal of the Deputy Principal Chief, or his or 
her inability to discharge the powers and duties of the office, the person who is then the Speaker 
of the Council shall succeed to the office of the Deputy Principal Chief for the balance of the 
term. In the case of temporary disability, said person shall serve as Acting Deputy Principal 
Chief for the duration of the disability and thereafter shall reassume the office of Speaker.

Section 5. The Council may, in the case of removal, death, resignation or disability of the 
Principal Chief, Deputy Principal Chief and the Speaker of the Council, provide by law what 
officer shall then act as Principal Chief until the disability be removed or a successor shall be 
elected.

Section 6.  The Principal Chief and Deputy Principal Chief shall, at stated times, receive 

for their service a compensation not inconsistent with Article X.

Section 7.  The Principal Chief may, on extraordinary occasions, convene the Council at 
the seat of government pursuant to Article VI, Section 5, and such notice and other laws as may 
be prescribed by the Council. The purposes of said meetings must be stated and the Council may 
consider only such matters as are specified in the call of the extraordinary meetings. Before the 
extraordinary meetings may be legally sufficient to conduct business, a quorum of the Council 
must be present.

Section 8.  At one session of the Council annually, the Principal Chief shall deliver and 
communicate to the Council a message upon the condition of the Cherokee Nation; and shall 
recommend such matters to the Council as he or she shall judge expedient.

Section 9.  The Principal Chief shall cause the laws of the Cherokee Nation to be 
faithfully executed, and shall conduct in person and in such manner as shall be prescribed by 

law, all communications and business of the Cherokee Nation. The Principal Chief may cause to 
be formed and operated, trusts, the beneficiary of which shall be the Cherokee Nation and these 
trusts shall be granted such powers as provided by law for public trusts. Authorization for these 
trusts, however, must be approved by a majority vote of the Council.

Section 10.  The Deputy Principal Chief shall, by virtue of the office, aid and advise the 

Principal Chief in the administration of the government.

Section 11.  Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as preventing the Principal 

Chief from employing such administrative assistants as deems proper.

Section 12. There shall be a cabinet composed of the following persons who shall be 
citizens of the Cherokee Nation: (1) Secretary of State, (2) Treasurer, (3) Secretary of Natural 
Resources. These persons shall be appointed by the Principal Chief and confirmed by the 
Council. The Council, on recommendation of the Principal Chief only, may create additional 
cabinet positions and departments. The Principal Chief shall prescribe the duties and 
responsibilities of cabinet members. Cabinet members shall be authorized to appoint such staff 
and other assistants as they deem necessary. The Council may, with recommendation of the 
Principal Chief, abolish any established cabinet position or function or revise the title or 
responsibilities of any foregoing department or function.

Section 13. There shall be created an office of Attorney General. The Attorney General 
shall be a citizen of the Cherokee Nation, admitted to practice law before the highest court of any 
state of the United States. The Attorney General shall represent the Nation in all criminal cases 
in the courts of the Nation, and in all civil actions wherein the Cherokee Nation is named as a 
party, and shall have such other duties as the Council may prescribe by law. The Attorney 
General shall be appointed by the Principal Chief and confirmed by the Council for a term of 
five (5) years. The Attorney General shall be authorized to designate such prosecutors and other 
assistants as deemed necessary to carry out the duties of office, and may only be removed from 
office in conformance with Article XI.

Section 14. There shall be created an office of Marshal. The Marshal shall be a citizen of 
the Cherokee Nation and possess such training and experience in law enforcement as prescribed 
by law. The duties and authority of the Marshal shall be prescribed by law. The Marshal shall be 
authorized to deputize such officers as necessary to carry out the law enforcement needs of the 
Cherokee Nation. The Marshal shall be appointed by the Principal Chief and be confirmed by the 
Council for a term of five (5) years. The Marshal may only be removed from office in 
conformance with Article XI.

The terms of the Marshal and the Attorney General shall not be concurrent.

Section 15. A vacancy of an elected office by reason of removal, death, resignation or 
disability of the elected official, for which this Constitution does not provide a process for 
seating a replacement to serve out the term, shall be filled by appointment by the Principal Chief 
with confirmation by the Council.

Article VIII. Judicial

Section 1. The Judicial powers of the Cherokee Nation shall be vested in a Supreme 
Court and such lower courts as the Council shall from time-to-time ordain and establish. The 
Judicial Appeals Tribunal shall become known as the Supreme Court of the Cherokee Nation. 
The Supreme Court shall be composed of five (5) members all of whom must be citizens of the 
Cherokee Nation and be admitted to practice law before the highest Court of any state of the 
United States.

Section 2. Justices of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by the Principal Chief and 
confirmed by the Council to serve terms of ten (10) years each after expiration of the initial 
terms as follows: Seat 1: ending 12/31/2000, Seat 2: ending 12/31/2002, Seat 3: ending 
12/31/2004, Seat 4: ending 12/31/2006, Seat 5: ending 12/31/2008. An appointment to the 
Supreme Court shall take place once every two (2) years, except in the case of filling a vacated 
seat on the Court for the remainder of that term. The Council shall, within six (6) months of this 
Constitution taking effect, pass such laws as are necessary for carrying into effect the provisions 
of this section.

Section 3. Judges of the District Court shall be citizens of the Cherokee Nation, and shall 
be admitted to practice law before the highest Court of any state of the United States, and shall 
be appointed by the Principal Chief and confirmed by the Council to serve terms of four (4) 
years each. In the event of a judicial vacancy due to death, resignation, or removal from said 
office, any successor duly appointed and confirmed shall only serve the balance of the term of 
the vacancy being filled.

Section 4. The original jurisdiction of the Supreme Court shall extend to a general 
supervisory control over all lower courts. General supervisory control does not include 
suspension, removal, or disciplinary action of any member of the judiciary. These powers are 
specifically reserved for the Court on the Judiciary as prescribed in Section 5 and/or Article XI.

The Supreme Court shall employ an Administrator, who shall have general administrative 
duties in the judicial branch. The Justices of the Supreme Court shall have supervisory authority 
over the Administrator.

In support of its original and appellate jurisdiction, the Supreme Court shall have power 
to issue, hear and determine writs of habeas corpus, mandamus, quo warranto, certiorari, 
prohibition and such other remedial writs as may be provided by law and may exercise such 
other jurisdiction as may be conferred by statute. The appellate jurisdiction of the Supreme Court 
shall extend to all cases at law and in equity arising under the laws or Constitution of the 
Cherokee Nation.

The Supreme Court shall promulgate rules of procedure relating to its original and 
appellate jurisdiction to insure any litigant appearing before it receives due process of law and 
impartial justice, together with prompt and speedy relief. Decisions of the Supreme Court shall 
be published and indexed and shall be final insofar as the judicial process of the Cherokee Nation 
is concerned.

Section 5. There is hereby created a Court on the Judiciary. Each branch of the 
government shall select two members of the Court; one of whom shall be a member of the 
Cherokee Nation Bar Association and the other shall be a non-lawyer. The six members shall 
appoint a seventh member. The members of the Court on the Judiciary shall promulgate its own 
rules of procedure, assuring due process, to be submitted to the Council for review and approval. 
The authority of the Court shall include suspension, sanction, discipline or recommendation of 
removal. The members shall not be employees of the Cherokee Nation or any entities thereof. 
The Council shall pass such laws as are necessary for carrying into effect the provisions of this 
section. All members of the Court shall be citizens of the Cherokee Nation.

Section 6. The District Courts of the Cherokee Nation shall be courts of general 
jurisdiction and shall be vested with original jurisdiction, not otherwise reserved to the Supreme 
Court, to hear and resolve disputes arising under the laws or Constitution of the Cherokee Nation 
in both law and equity, whether criminal or civil in nature. The Council shall enact, with advice 
from the judiciary, rules of procedure which shall insure that all litigants receive due process of 
law and impartial justice, together with prompt and speedy relief.

Section 7. The Justices of the Supreme Court and Judges of the District Court shall 
receive a compensation which shall not be diminished during their continuance in office, but 
shall receive no other fee, gratuity or perquisite of office, nor hold any other position of title, 
trust or profit within the Cherokee Nation or any entity thereof, either directly or indirectly.

Section 8. Members of the judiciary shall be subject to removal from office only for 
willful neglect of duty, corruption in office, habitual drunkenness, incompetency or any 
conviction of a felony, a crime under the laws of the Cherokee Nation that if committed in some 
other jurisdiction would be a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or offenses 
against the Cherokee Nation committed while in office.

Article IX. Election

Section 1. There is hereby created a Cherokee Nation Election Commission. The 
Commission shall be an autonomous and permanent entity charged with the administration of all 
Cherokee Nation elections, in accordance with election laws. The Council shall enact an 
appropriate law not inconsistent with the provisions of this Constitution that will govern the 
conduct of all elections.

Section 2. No person who shall have been convicted of a felony charge under the laws of 
United States, or of any State, Territory, or Possession thereof, or a crime under the laws of the 
Cherokee Nation that if committed in some other jurisdiction would be a felony, shall be eligible 
to hold any office or appointment of honor, profit or trust within this Nation unless such person 
has received a pardon from the appropriate jurisdiction. Any person who holds any office of 
honor, profit or trust in any other tribe or Nation of American Indians, either elective or 
appointive shall be ineligible to hold simultaneously any office of honor, profit or trust of the 
Cherokee Nation unless approved by the Council.

Section 3. All elections shall be determined by secret balloting.

Article X. Fiscal

Section 1. The fiscal year shall commence on the first day of October in each year, unless 

otherwise provided by law.

Section 2. The Council shall provide by law for annual expenditure of funds, and the 
source from which funds are to be derived, to defray the estimated expenses of the Executive, 
Legislative, and Judicial branches and the departments of government of the Cherokee Nation for 
each fiscal year. The budget shall not exceed estimated revenues.

Section 3. At least forty-five (45) days prior to the beginning of each fiscal year, the 
Treasurer shall cause to be made and presented to the Council an itemized estimate of revenues 
and expenditures for the ensuing fiscal year adhering to Generally Accepted Accounting 
Principles (GAAP).

Section 4. The Council shall require that records be maintained and provided to the 
Council of all funds, monies, accounts and indebtedness and all other accounts bearing upon the 
fiscal interests, including but not limited to, any and all outside business interests, both for-profit 
and not-for-profit, of the Cherokee Nation by the use of an accounting system adhering to 
Generally Accepted Accounting Principles (GAAP). The annual financial statement shall be 
audited by a Certified Public Accountant and presented to the Council within six months 
following the end of each fiscal year. Unaudited reports will be submitted as required by the 
Council.

Section 5. The Treasurer shall be authorized to accept all grants, donations of money, 
interest of funds of the Cherokee Nation, judgments and any and all other sources of monies 
available to the Cherokee Nation, for uses and purposes and upon the conditions and limitations 
for which the same are granted or donated. The faith of the Cherokee Nation is hereby pledged to 
preserve such grants and donations as a sacred trust, and, if or when designated, to keep the same 
for the use and purposes for which they were granted or donated.

Section 6. The Council shall authorize the Treasurer to invest funds or money of the 
Cherokee Nation and determine the preference to be given to the security for such investments, 
the manner of selecting the securities, prescribing the rules, regulations, restrictions and 
conditions upon which the funds shall be loaned or invested, provided that no investment shall be 
in mortgages other than first mortgages only, and do all things necessary for the safety of the 
funds and permanence of the investments. If required by law, such investments would be subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Section 7. The credit of the Cherokee Nation shall not be given, pledged, or loaned to 
any individual, firm, company, corporation, or association without the approval of the Council. 
The Cherokee Nation shall not make any donations by gift, bonus, or otherwise, to any 
individual, firm, company, corporation, or association without the approval of the Council.

Section 8. All laws authorizing the expenditures of money by and on behalf of the 
Cherokee Nation shall specify the purpose for which the money is to be used, and the money so 
designated shall be used for no other purpose. No monies or resources of the Cherokee Nation or 
any of its entities shall be used to pay for representation of a defendant in a criminal matter, 
except where a public defender is authorized under Cherokee law. Annual expenditures shall not 
exceed the available funds.

Section 9. General laws shall be enacted by the Council providing for the deposit of 
funds of the Cherokee Nation, and the depository thereof, and such funds shall be under the 
control of the Treasurer, under such terms and conditions as shall be designated by the Council 
and under such laws which shall provide for the protection of said funds.

Section 10. No official, member or officer of the Council, Cabinet Member, employee of 
any official, Council, Cabinet, or subdivisions thereof, or any person employed in any capacity 
by the Cherokee Nation shall receive from any individual, partnership, corporation, or entity 
doing business with the Cherokee Nation directly or indirectly, any interest, profit, benefits or 
gratuity, other than wages, salary, per diem, or expenses specifically provided by law.

Section 11. All officers, elected or appointed, who are authorized by this Constitution or 
any subsequent legislation to a position of trust over any land, property, accounts or monies, 
shall execute an official surety bond in the amount as may be required by the Council. Such 
surety bonds shall inure to the benefit of, and be paid for by, the Cherokee Nation for whose 
protection or surety the same shall be required. In no event shall said surety bond be other than 
by a Licensed Insurance Company, authorized to do business in the State of Oklahoma.

Article XI. Removal From Office

Section 1. The Principal Chief, Deputy Principal Chief, members of the Council, 
Attorney General and Marshal shall be subject to removal from office for willful neglect of duty, 
corruption in office, habitual drunkenness, incompetency or any conviction of a felony, or a 
crime under the laws of the Cherokee Nation that if committed in some other jurisdiction would 
be a felony, or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude or offenses against the Cherokee Nation 
committed while in office.

Section 2. Except as otherwise provided in this Constitution, all other appointed officials 

shall be subject to removal for cause, as prescribed by law.

Section 3. No official may be removed under Sections 1 or 2 of this Article or Section 8 
of Article VIII except after trial before the Council, with the accused having been afforded due 
process and opportunity to be heard. Provided, removal under Sections 1 or 2 of this Article or 
Section 8 of Article VIII shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the members of the Council.

Section 4. Separate from the Council's removal powers, the People of the Cherokee 
Nation reserve unto themselves the exclusive power to recall any elected official through petition 
and recall referendum. A petition must be signed by Cherokee citizens registered to vote. In the 
case of Principal Chief or Deputy Principal Chief, signatures must total a number equaling or 

exceeding fifteen percent (15%) of the total number of registered voters in the previous general 
election. In the case of district offices, signatures must total the greater of five hundred (500) or 
twenty-five percent (25%) of the total number of registered voters in that district in the previous 
general election. The signed petition shall be filed with the Election Commission to determine 
whether the signatures are valid. Said determination shall be made within thirty (30) days after 
the filing of same. Upon verification of the requisite number of signatures the Election 
Commission shall certify the petition as valid and notify the Council and the Secretary of State. 
Upon notification of a valid certified petition the Council shall immediately call for and approve 
a special recall election for the office in question within sixty (60) days. The special recall 
election shall be limited in scope to the voting populous for the elected office in question. Votes 
casts shall be tabulated and the results certified in the same manner as in general elections. A 
majority vote to affirm the official shall retain the official in office. A majority vote to recall 
shall immediately remove the official from office. In the event of a tie-vote the Council shall call 
a special meeting to conduct a tie-breaking vote. Elected offices vacated under this section shall 
be filled as otherwise provided in this Constitution.

Article XII. Employee Rights

No employee, who having served in a position at least one (1) year, shall be removed 
from the employment of the Cherokee Nation except for cause, and only after being afforded 
pre-termination due process. Provided, the right of such employee to seek redress in the 
Cherokee Nation courts shall not be abridged.

Article XIII. Oath

Section 1. All officers elected or appointed shall, before entering upon the duties of their 
respective offices, take and subscribe to the following oath or affirmation: "I do solemnly swear, 
or affirm, that I will faithfully execute the duties of _______________ of the Cherokee Nation, 
and will, to the best of my ability, preserve, protect and defend the Constitutions of the Cherokee 
Nation, and the United States of America. I swear or affirm further, that I will do everything 
within my power to promote the culture, heritage and traditions of the Cherokee Nation."

Section 2. The foregoing oath shall be administered by any person authorized by the 

Council to administer oaths. The oath shall be filed in the Office of the Secretary of State.

Article XIV. Clans

Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed to prohibit the right of any Cherokee to 

belong to a recognized clan or organization in the Cherokee Nation.

Article XV. Initiative, Referendum and Amendment

Section 1. Notwithstanding the provisions of Article VI, the People of the Cherokee 
Nation reserve to themselves the power to propose laws and amendments to this Constitution and 
to enact or reject the same at the polls independent of the Council, and also reserve power at their 
own option to approve or reject at the polls any act of the Council.

Section 2. Any amendment or amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by the 
Council, and if the same shall be agreed to by a majority of all the members of the Council, such 
proposed amendment or amendments shall, with the yeas and nays thereon, be entered into the 
Journal and referred by the Secretary of State to the People for their approval or rejection, at the 
next regular general election, except when the Council, by a two-thirds (2/3) vote, shall order a 
special election for that purpose. If a majority of all the registered voters voting at such election 
shall vote in favor of any amendment thereto, it shall thereby become a part of this Constitution.

Section 3. The first power reserved by the People of the Cherokee Nation is the initiative, 
and ten percent (10%) of the registered voters shall have the right to propose any legislative 
measures by petition and fifteen percent (15%) of the registered voters shall have the right to 
propose amendments to the Constitution by petition, and every such petition shall include the full 
text of the measure so proposed.

The second power is the referendum, and it may be ordered (except as to laws necessary 
for the immediate preservation of the public peace, health or safety), either by petition signed by 
five percent (5%) of the registered voters or by the Council as other enactments are effectuated. 
The ratio and percent of registered voters hereinbefore stated shall be based upon the total 
number of votes cast in the last general election involving the office of Principal Chief.

Section 4. Referendum petitions shall be filed with the Secretary of State not more than 
ninety (90) days after the final adjournment of the session or meeting of the Council which 
passed the bill on which the referendum is demanded. The veto power of the Principal Chief 
shall not extend to measures voted on by the People. All elections on measures referred to the 
People of the Cherokee Nation shall be had at the next regular general election except when the 
Council or the Principal Chief shall order a special election for the express purpose of making 
such reference. Any measure referred to the People by the initiative shall take effect and be in 
force when it shall have been approved by a majority of the votes cast thereon.

Section 5. Petitions and orders for the initiative and for the referendum shall be filed with 
the Secretary of State and addressed to the Principal Chief of the Cherokee Nation, who shall 
submit the same to the People. The Council shall make suitable provisions for carrying into 
effect the provisions of this Article.

Section 6. The referendum may be demanded by the People against one or more items, 
sections or parts of any enactment of the Council in the same manner in which such power may 
be exercised against a complete enactment. The filing of a referendum petition against one or 
more items, sections or parts of an enactment shall not delay the remainder of such act from 
becoming operative.

Section 7. If two or more amendments are proposed they shall be submitted in such 

manner that registered voters may vote for or against them separately.

Section 8. No proposal for the amendment of this Constitution which is submitted to the 
voters shall embrace more than one general subject and the voters shall vote separately for or 

against each proposal submitted; provided, however, that in the submission of proposals for the 
amendment of this Constitution by articles, which embrace a general subject, each proposed 
article shall be deemed a single proposal or proposition.

Section 9. No convention shall be called by the Council to propose a new Constitution, 
unless the law providing for such convention shall first be approved by the People on a 
referendum vote at a regular or special election. Any amendments, alterations, revisions or new 
Constitution, proposed by such convention, shall be submitted to the registered voters of the 
Cherokee Nation at a general or special election and be approved by a majority of the registered 
voters voting thereon before the same shall become effective. The question of such proposed 
convention shall be submitted to the citizens of the Cherokee Nation at least once every twenty 
(20) years.

Article XVI. Supersedes Constitutions of 1839 and 1976

The provisions of this Constitution overrule, supersede, and repeal the provisions of the 
Cherokee Nation Constitution enacted the 6th day of September, 1839, and the provisions of the 
Constitution of the Cherokee Nation of Oklahoma enacted the 26th day of June, 1976.

Article XVII. Seat of Government

The Seat of Government of the Cherokee Nation shall be at Tahlequah, Oklahoma.

Article XVIII. Adoption

This Constitution shall become effective when ratified by the registered voters of the 
Cherokee Nation. It shall be engrossed on parchment and signed by the Principal Chief and the 
President of the United States, or his authorized representative. It shall be filed in the office of 
the Cherokee Nation and sacredly preserved as the fundamental law of the Cherokee Nation. The 
Constitution shall be printed in both Cherokee and English, provided however, that the English 
version shall be controlling for all governmental and legal purposes. The Council shall enact 
laws in conformance with this Constitution within eighteen (18) months of its ratification, 
provided that the provisions for Article XI shall be enacted within six (6) months of its 
ratification.

