 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
 
OF
THE CHEYENNE-ARAPAHO TRIBES OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Indians of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, in order 
to promote more unified tribal economic progress, to better transact our tribal 
business and industrial affairs, to protect our religious rights, to protect and 
maintain our allotted lands, to look after our just claims and our rights under 
treaty stipulations, to borrow money from the Federal Government--such funds 
to constitute a tribal revolving fund from which sums may be lent to individual 
members of the tribes and to groups of members for cooperative enterprises— 
to participate in the management of tribal lands and property, to assist and 
advise in the purchase of land which the government may obtain for landless 
members of the tribes, to negotiate with the representatives of federal, state, 
and local governments in regard to all matters affecting the tribes now or in 
the future, and to further the general welfare of ourselves and our posterity, 
do hereby adopt the following constitution and by-laws pursuant to the 
Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1836, which shall 
replace as our governing document that constitution and by-laws ratified 
September 18, 1937, and all amendments thereto.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - DEFINITION OF TERMS

 
 Section 1. Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma shall be the name of this 
organization, and it shall be composed of all persons who qualify for member
ship pursuant to Article II of this constitution. The word tribes, as used in 
this document, shall have the same meanings as Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes 
of Oklahoma. 
 
 

,

 
 Sec. 2. Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribal Council shall be the governing body 
of the organization , composed of all enrolled members at least eighteen (18) 
years of age, and empowered to act on those matters outlined in Article IV, 
Section 1, of this constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 3. Cheyenne-Arapaho Business Committee shall be an eight (8) 
member representative body empowered to act on those matters outlined in 
Article IV, Sections 2 through 5 , and elected pursuant to Article VIII of this 
constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 4. Business Manager shall be a full-time, tribal employee selected 
by the business committee to manage the tribal headquarters and assist the 
committee as provided in the by-laws. Such employee must have a minimum 
of six years' experience in the field of administration and management to 
qualify.

Sec. 5.  Quorum

a. 

Business Committee and Election Board: A quorum for each shall 
consist of at least five 
present to transact tribal business, provided that until the first 
election for the business committee is held under this constitution 
and by-laws and the members sworn in, a quorum of the business 
committee shall be at least eight (8) members.

(5) of the elected members and must be

b. 

Tribal Council: A quorum shall be composed of not less than 
seventy-five members .

See. 6. Election Board shall be a board composed of eight (8) members of 
the tribal council. The Cheyenne and Arapahos shall be represented on this 
board in the exact proportion as on the business committee.

Sec. 7. Referendum shall be the submission of any issue to a direct popular 
vote of the registered members of the tribal council by mailout ballot. When 
required by this constitution, the business committee shall direct the election 
board to conduct all referendums

Sec. 8. Headquarters of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma shall 
be located in Concho, Oklahoma.

Sec. 9. As used in this constitution and by-laws, the word shall is deemed 
to mean imperative or mandatory and to exclude the exercise of discretion. The 
word may is deemed to mean permission or liberty and to include the exercise 
of discretion.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes shall consist of 
the following persons:

a. 

b. 

c. 

All persons whose names appear on the tribal membership 
roll prepared pursuant to the Act of October 31, 1967; pro
vided that corrections may be made to the roll at any time, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Each person of 1/4, or more, degree of blood of the Cheyenne- 
Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, born after October 31, 1967, 
but prior to the effective date of this constitution and by-laws, 
both of whose parents are members of the tribes.

Each person of l/4, or more, degree of blood of the Cheyenne-
Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, born after October 31, 1967, 
but prior to the effective date of this constitution and by-laws 
to a member of the tribes , if such is admitted to membership 
by a majority vote of the business committee certifying 
compliance with this section.

d. 

Each person of 1/4, or more, degree of blood of the Cheyenne- 
Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, born to a member of the tribes 
after the effective date of this constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 2. Persons who possess blood of another Indian tribe shall not be 
enrolled if they have shared in any land or money by virtue of having been 
enrolled as a member of the other tribe.

Sec . 3. For purposes of determining degree of Cheyenne-Arapaho Indian 
blood possessed by applicants for membership, the degree of Cheyenne- 
Arapaho Indian blood shewn on the October 31, 19S7, roll snail govern. 
Corrections may be made in degree of Cheyenne-Arapaho Indian blood shown 
on the roll if a request, in writing, is received from the enrollee or one of 
his descendants, and approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
The burden of proof in establishing a degree of Indian blood other than that 
shown on the roll is on the party making the request.

Sec. 4. The tribal council shall have the power to enact resolutions and/or 
ordinances, subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior, governing 
future membership and the adoption of new members.
 
 

ARTICLE III - INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND PRESENT SERVICES

 
 Section. 1. To the extent applicable , no person shall be denied by the tribes in 
exercising self-government those rights guaranteed in Title II of the Act of 
April 11, 1968, including freedom of speech, conscience, worship, and assembly.

Sec. 2. Individual rights in allotted and inherited lands shall not be 
disturbed by anything contained in this constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 3. No treaty rights of the tribes shall be in anyway affected by any 
provision of this constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 4. The rights of members as citizens of the United States and of the 
State of Oklahoma shall not be disturbed by anything contained in this 
constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 5. Existing aids and services extended to the tribes, such as health 
service, education, extension service, etc., shall not be curtailed because of 
anything contained in this constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 6. In all recommendations by the tribes for employment of persons to 
fill positions with the tribes or within the jurisdiction of the Concho Agency, 
first preference shall be given to enrolled members of this organization; and 
second preference shall be given to persons married to members of this 
organization.

Sec. 7. All enrolled members of the tribes shall be eligible for all rights, 
privileges, and benefits given by this constitution and by-laws, such as claims, 
credits, acquisition of land, all educational grants, and any other future 
benefits.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - COUNCIL AND COMMITTEE AUTHORITIES

 
 Section 1. The Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribal Council shall have the authority to 
act in tribal council meetings concerning the following matters, unless 
specifically delegated to the business committee by a referendum vote of the 
members of the tribal council:

a.  Approval of annual budget.

b.  Any surface lease or easement of tribal land in excess of 

five (5) years.

c.  Legal counsel contracts.

d.  Claims and recovery of land.

e.  To enact resolutions and/or ordinances governing future 

membership.

f.  Propose amendments to the constitution and by-laws.

g.  Alter district boundaries.

h.  The members of the tribal council may limit or restrict 

any of' the powers of thebusiness committee, but only by 
referendum vote.

Sec. 2. The Cheyenne-Arapaho Business Committee, subject to applicable 
federal and state laws , shall have the power to act for the tribes in all matters 
not enumerated in Section 1 of this Article and in Article XI and as otherwise 
restricted by this constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 3. The business committee shall not expend and the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs shall not dispense tribal funds in excess of those set forth in the 
approved annual budget unless specifically authorized by the tribal council.

Sec. 4. All action taken by either the tribal council or business committee 
shall be pursuant to duly adopted ordinances or resolutions and shall be 
certified by the presiding officer. Action by the business committee shall be 
by roll-call vote which shall be recorded in the minutes.

Sec. 5. Compensation for easiness committee and special representatives:

a.  Mileage Rates: Mileage rates shall coincide with the pre

vailing Concho Agency mileage rates.

b.  Per diem Rates: Per diem rates shall be based on the 

prevailing maximum over-night traval rates of the Concho 
Agency. Payment being computed at six (6) hour quarters 
beginning at 6:00 a.m., 12:00 noon, 6:00 p.m., and 12:00 
midnight.

c.  Compensation to members of the business committee: 

Mileage and per diem rates may be paid for those meet
ings specified in Article XVI, Sections 1 through 6, of 
the by-laws provided that mileage shall not exceed the 
farthest point in the representative’s district to the meet
ing place, and per diem rates shall apply only while the 
meetings are in session.

d.  Compensation to members of the business committee and 

special representatives; Other meetings requiring repre
sentation of the tribes as per Article XVI, Sections 2 and 
8, of the by-laws, such persons shall be paid per diem, 
mileage, and common carrier expenses as approved by 
the business committee.

e.  Computation and Payments:

1. 

 Members of the business committee and election board will 
be required to sign in and out, so that payment can be 
determined.

2.  Payments shall be made monthly to cover all mileage, 

per diem, and common carrier expense.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTION BOARD

 
 Section 1. For purposes of conducting the initial election under this 
constitution, the Superintendent of the Concho Agency, his replacement, 
successor or counter-part shall call a special meeting of the tribal council 
for purposes of selecting the 8 member board. Following the first election, 
under this constitution, an election board shall be selected at the annual 
meeting of the tribal council on even numbered years. Nomination and voting 
shall be done from the floor. All members shall consent to serve for two (2) 
years. This board shall appoint a temporary chairman at the time of the 
election. Vacancies on the board shall be filled by appointment of the chairman 
of the election board. No member of the business committee or any person 
running for office on the committee shall be eligible to serve on the election 
board.

Sec. 2.

a.  The election board will meet at the tribal headquarters within 
thirty (30) days after its election and select from its members 
a chairman, vice-chairman, and secretary.

b.  Consistent with the provisions of this constitution and by-laws 

the board shall establish the necessary dates , qualifications, rules 
and regulations to govern the election of committeemen and refer
endum voting. Such rules and regulations shall include provi
sions for registration, nomination of candidates, the mailing 
out of and receipt of ballots, the tallying of ballots case, and 
the contest of any election or referendum.
 
 

 
 
 
 c.  The chairman of the board shall, as soon as possible, certify 
to the business committee, in writing, the results of each 
election or referendum and present an itemized statement of 
all expenses. 

Sec. 3.

a. Compensation to members of the election board shall be at 

the same rate as to business committee members provided that in 
conjunction with each election and referendum not more than 
a total of one (1) working day for organizing, not more than a 
total of three (3) working days for the establishing of dates, 
qualifications, rules and regulations, and not more than a 
total of three (3) working days for the conducting and tallying 
of an election or referendum will be allowed unless approved 
by the business committee upon evidence of just cause.

Sec. 4. The business committee and tribal employees shall assist in the 
elections as required by the election board.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - DESIGNATION OF DISTRICTS

 
 Section 1. For the purpose of registration, representation and voting, there 
shall be four Cheyenne districts , each of which shall be entitled to one 
representative, and two Arapaho districts, each of which shall be entitled to 
two representatives. Said districts shall be designated and described as 
follows:

A.  Cheyenne Districts:

The Seiling, Watonga, and Londale District shall begin 
at a point located at the Northwest corner of Kingfisher 
County, thence south to the north boundary line of Cana
dian County, thence west to the northwest corner of 
Canadian County, thence north three miles, thence west 
eight miles, thence south three miles, thence west nine 
miles, more or less, to an intersection with the North 
Canadian River, thence northwestwardly along the course 
of the North Canadian River through Blaine, Custer, 
Dewey, and Ellis counties , to the west boundary of the 
Concho Agency area, thence north to the northwest corner 
of the Concho Agency area, thence east along the north 
line of the Concho Agency area to the place or point of 
beginning.

2.  The Kingfisher, El Reno, and Calumcnt District shall begin 
at a point located at the northwest corner of Kingfisher 
County on the north boundary of the Concho Agency area, 
thence south to the north boundary line of Canadian County, 
thence west to the northwest corner of Canadian County, 
thence north three miles , thence west eight miles , thence 
south three miles, thence west nine miles, more or less , 
to an intersection with the North Canadian River, thence 
southeastwardly along the course of the North Canadian 
River to the southeast corner of the Concho Agency area, 
thence north along the east boundary of the Concho Agency 
area to an intersection with Interstate Highway 40, thence 
east along Interstate Highway 40 a distance of four miles, 
thence north a distance of five miles, thence west to the 
east line of the Concho Agency area, thence north along 
the east line of the Concho Agency area to a point three 
miles south of U.S. Highway 33, thence east to a point two 
miles east of U.S. Highway 81, thence north a distance of 
five miles , thence west to the east boundary of the Concho Agency 
area, thence north along the east border of the Concho Agency 
area to the north border of the Concho Agency area, thence west 
to the place or point of beginning,

3.  The Thomas, Deer Creek, Weatherford, and Clinton District 

shall begin at the intersection of the North Canadian River 
and the east line of Custer County, thence southerly along the - 
east line of Custer and Washita Counties to the southeast cor
ner of Washita County, thence westwardly along the south line 
of the Concho Agency area to a point six miles west of the U.S. 
Highway 183, thence northerly along a line six miles west and 
parallel to U.S . Highway 183 to an intersection with the North 
Canadian River, thence eastwardly along the course of the 
North Canadian River to the place or point of beginning.

4.  The Hammon and Elk City District shall begin at a point on 

the south line of Washita County six miles west of U.S . High
way 183, thence west along the south line of Washita and 
Beckham Counties to the Red River, thence northwestwardly 
along the course of the Red River and the Concho Agency area 
to the west line of the Concho Agency area thence north along 
the west line of the Concho Agency area to an intersection with 
the North Canadian River, thence eastwardly along the course 
of the North Canadian River to a point six miles west of U S. 
Highway 183, thence southerly along a line six miles west of 
and parallel to U.S. Highway 183 to the place or point of 
beginning.

B.  Arapaho Districts:

1.  The Canton District shall be that described for the Cheyenne 

District of Seiling, Watonga, and Londale (District 1).

2.  The Geary , Greenfield , and Colony District shall be the total 
area of Cheyenne Districts 2,3, and 4 described above.

Sec. 2. The boundaries of the above described districts may be altered or 
realigned by the tribal council as provided in Article IV, Section 1. The 
number of districts and the number of representatives of each tribe shall be 
changed only by an amendment to this constitution and by-laws.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - REGISTRATION

 
 Section 1. Members of the tribal council, in order to vote for tribal repre
sentatives or to participate in any tribal referendum, will be required to 
register either in person at the tribal headquarters or by written request to 
the tribal secretary. Only those persons duly registered will be permitted to 
run for tribal office.

Sec. 2. Registration shall be temporarily closed thirty (30) days prior to 
the date for counting ballots and until the certification of the final results. 
All elections or referendums shall be publicly noticed at the tribal office, Concho 
Agency, the tribal newsletter and/or other appropriate news papers not 
less than sixty (60) days prior to the date for counting ballots.

Sec. 3. Cheyenne members of the tribal council not residing within a
Cheyenne district and Arapaho members not residing within an Arapaho district 
may register to vote with any district of their own tribe. Other members, in 
order to vote, shall register with the district in which they reside by tribe.

Sec. 4. No registered voter will be allowed to change his place of 
registration except upon change of residence or for other just cause. Such 
cause shall be submitted to tribal headquarters, in writing or in person, for 
consideration by the business committee. The decision of the committee 
shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. The election of the committeemen shall be determined by those 
ballots returned to the tribal office not later than 6: 00 p.m. on the day set for 
counting ballots as specified by the election board. Each registered voter shall 
be furnished a ballot, by mail, containing the names of candidates from his 
district at least twenty-one (21) days prior to counting the ballots.

a.  Ballots mailed to registered voters shall be accompanied by 

a blank envelope and an envelope addressed to the chairman 
of the election board. Those wishing to vote shall indicate 
their selection on the ballot, seal it in the blank envelope, 
and insert the blank envelope in the envelope addressed to the 
chairman of the board. The voter shall affix his signature 
across the back of the addressed envelope. Upon receipt by 
the board of a ballot, the name on the outside of the addressed 
envelope shall be checked against the appropriate list of 
registered voters, the blank envelopes containing the ballot 
cast by the eligible voter separated from the other and deposited 
in a sealed box, where it shall remain until counted pursuant to 
the rules of election .

b.  Those districts electing only one representative shall, in the 

event no candidate received more than fifty (50) percent of 
the votes cast, hold a runoff election between the two (2) 
candidates receiving the most votes. Such elections shall 
be completed in November in odd-numbered years.

c.  For the first election under this constitution and by-laws in those 
districts electing more than one representative, each candidate 
shall file for either a 2-year or a 4-year term. Voters of such 
districts shall be entitled to cast one vote for a candidate seeking 
a 2-year term and one vote for a candidate seeking a 4-year term. 
In the event no candidate receives more than fifty (50) percent 
of the votes cast, a runoff election shall be held between the 
two (2) candidates who received the most votes running for a 
2-year term and between the two (2) candidates who received the 
most votes running for a 4-year term.

Sec. 2. For the purpose of providing staggered four (4) year terms for 
members of the business committee, those rules and regulations adopted to 
govern the first election under this constitution shall provide for the election 
of two (2) Cheyenne and two (2) Arapaho committeemen for two (2) year terms.

The election board shall determine by a drawing which Cheyenne district 
representatives shall be elected for two (2) year terms and which representatives 
shall be elected for four (4) year terms.

Sec. 3. The term of office for each committeeman elected after the first 
election shall be for a period of four (4) years, or until his successor is duly 
elected and installed in office.

a. 

Each committeeman shall be eligible to serve three (3) consec

utive terms. At the completion of his third (3rd) consecutive 
term, a committeeman shall not be eligible for re-election or 
eligible to fill a vacancy until a period of two (2) years has 
elapsed. For the purpose of this sub-section, a partial term 
shall be considered a term.

Sec. 4 The term of office of all business committee members elected 
under this constitution shall commence January 1st after their election. Prior 
to the first meeting after December 31st, the oath of office shall be administered 
to the newly elected members of the business committee. Said oath shall be 
administered by any member of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes duly designated 
by the business committee elect. At the first meeting, the business committee 
Shall select the following officers from its membership: chairman, vice
chairman, secretary, treasurer, and sergeant-at-arms. They shall hold 
office for a term of two (2) years, or until their successors are duly chosen 
and installed.

Sec. 5. Eligibility: All registered tribal members who have reached the 
age of twenty one (21) years shall be eligible to serve as a member of the 
business committee, except those persons previously convicted in a court of 
competent jurisdiction of a felony involving dishonesty. A twenty-five 
dollar ($25) filing fee will be required of each candidate payable to the 
Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes to help defray the election expense.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FILLING VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Any member of the business committee charged, in writing, with 
misconduct or neglect of duty by a fellow committeeman may be removed from 
the business committee or from an office of the business committee, provided 
at least five (5) of the members vote in favor of removal. A special meeting of 
the committee shall be called to consider any removal action; and the accused 

shall be provided with a minimum of fifteen (15) days notice of said hearing 
and be provided the opportunity to attend and testify in his own behalf. The 
decision of the committee shall be final.

Sec. 2. The Cheyenne-Arapaho Business Committee shall, upon receipt of 
a valid petition signed by one-third (1/3) of the registered voters of any one 
district requesting the recall of a representative from that district, direct the 
election board to conduct an election within sixty-five (65) days from the date 
of receiving the petition to determine if, in fact, such representative shall be 
recalled. No such petition shall be honored if received less than ninety (90) 
days prior to the expiration of the term of the accused. In the event the com
mittee fails to act within sixty-five (65) days, the Superintendent of the Concho 
Agency, his replacement, successor, or counterpart may so instruct the board.

Sec. 3. Vacancies on the business committee occurring not less than 
ninety (90) days prior to the regularly scheduled election for the vacant 
position shall be filled by a special election conducted by the election board. 
Such elections shall involve the registered voters in the district which has 
lost representation and shall be conducted in accord with established dates, 
rules , and regulations of the election board .

a. 

If any of the business committee offices designated in 

Article XIV become vacant, such vacancies shall be 
filled promptly by a selection from the remaining 
members by the business committee.

b. 

Any person filling a vacancy may serve through the unex

pired term of his predecessor.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Referendum shall be required as follows:

a.  To approve the sale, exchange, or mortgage of tribal lands. 
 
 

-

 
 b.  To approve the expenditure of tribal monies , the incurrence 
of tribal indebtedness, or the encumberance or obligation of 
tribal assets for any single transaction or purpose amounting 
to more than $15,000.00.

c.  Should a valid petition bearing the signatures of at least

250 council members be submitted to the business committee, 
the committee shall direct the election board to call and

hold, within no less than sixty-five (65) days from the 
date of receiving the petition, a referendum as directed 
by the petitioners . Until such referendum is held , action 
on the issue in question shall be suspended.

Sec. 2. The majority of votes in any referendum shall be final and 
conclusive providing one-third (1/3) of the ballots mailed out are returned for 
counting; and no issue may be subjected again to a referendum for a period 
of at least six (6) months.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - TRIBAL NON-TRUST LANDS

 
 Section 1. Expenditure or other disposition of all of the net income, 
rental or profits, and the interest or earnings thereon, derived from non
trust lands now or hereafter owned by the tribes, shall be permitted only 
if approved by an affirmative referendum vote of the tribal council and 
shall be for any purpose it desires , provided that expenditures not in 
excess of $15,000 and only for repairs or upkeep to non-trust lands may 
be authorized by a duly adopted resolution of the tribal council. As used 
herein, the term "net income, rental or profits" shall mean gross income, 
rental or profits realized from said lands less only ad valorem or other 
property taxes assessed by and paid to federal, state or local taxing 
authorities.

See. 2. Subject to the limitations prescribed in Article IV and Article XI 
of this constitution, the business committee shall negotiate and enter into 
leases or other agreements regarding the use of said lands, collect the gross 
income, rentals and profits therefrom, pay the necessary taxes upon the lands 
as the same become due, and invest the net proceeds in securities or invest
ments fully guaranteed as to both principal and interest by the United States 
of America or agencies or instrumentalities thereof.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 Until such time as the first election is held under this constitution and by-laws, 
the incumbent committee members and officers shall continue to serve in that 
capacity subject, however, to the provisions of this document. The first 
primary and/or runoff election under this constitution shall be completed by 
November, in the odd numbered years following the adoption of this constitu
tion and by-laws . Ballots will be counted on a date determined by the election 
board. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore adopted, and not in conflict 
With this document, shall continue in force until duly modified or repealed.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this constitution and by-laws may be proposed by the majority 
vote of the tribal council at an annual or special council meeting; and, if 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to a referendum 
vote of the members of the tribes and shall be effective if approved by a 
majority vote of those voting.


BY-LAWS OF THE CHEYENNE-ARAPAHO TRIBES OF OKLAHOMA

ARTICLE XIV- DUTIES OF OFFICERS AND BUSINESS MANAGER


Section 1. The chairman of the business committee shall preside over all 
meetings of the committee, shall perform all the duties of a chairman, and 
exercise any authority delegated to him by the business committee. He shall 
have the privilege of voting in case of a tie. He shall further preside at all 
meetings of the tribal council, unless a different presiding officer is selected 
by the tribal council at the outset or at any time during the course of the 
meeting.

Sec. 2. The vice-chairman of the business committee shall call the roll 
at the opening of each meeting. He shall then read the minutes of the previous 
meeting. The minutes shall be corrected as necessary and approved by the 
business committee.

Sec. 3. The secretary shall call to the attention of the business committee 
any unfinished business from the previous meeting. The secretary shall read 
to the committee all communications which have been received by said commit
tee. It shall be the duty of the secretary to answer all correspondence after it 
has been discussed and a decision made by the business committee. The 
secretary shall certify to the accuracy of all actions taken by the council and 
the committee.

Sec. 4. The treasurer of the business committee shall be custodian of all 
monies which come under the jurisdiction or control of the Cheyenne-Arapaho 
Business Committee. He shall conserve, invest, and pay out money in accord
ance with the provisions of this constitution and by-laws and pursuant to the 
orders and resolutions of the business committee provided, however, that as 
to any account or other deposit maintained by the tribes with a bank or other 
depository or institution all checks, drafts, or other withdrawals on or against 
said account or deposit shall require two (2) signatures, which signatures 
shall include that of the treasurer and that of such other officers or members of 
the business committee as the committee may designate by resolution. The 

treasurer shall keep account of all receipts and disbursements and shall 
report the same to the business committee at each regular meeting. He shall 
be bonded in such an amount as the business committee by resolution shall 
provide, such bond to be satisfactory to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 
The treasurer shall cooperate and coordinate with the business manager, who 
shall keep a double-entry set of books which shall be subject to audit or 
inspection at any time at the discretion of the business committee. Said books 
shall be maintained at the tribal headquarters . At the conclusion of each 
calendar year , said books and records for said year shall be promptly 
delivered to the Superintendent of the Concho Agency of the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, who shall cause an audit of said books and records to be 
made by appropriate officials of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. A written 
report regarding the results of each such audit shall be submitted to the 
business committee by the Bureau of Indian Affairs as promptly as possible.

Sec. 5. The sergeant-at-arms shall maintain order and decorum at all 
meetings and such similar duties as may be directed by the presiding 
officer.

Sec. 6. The business manager shall:

a.  Manage the tribal office and maintain the order of tribal 
records and make them available to members of the tri
bal council and business committee as appropriate and — 
to insure their security.

b.  Take care of those duties which may be assigned by the 

business committee.

c.  Assist the election board.

d.  Maintain a double-entry set of books and records reflecting 
all receipts and disbursements of tribal funds and generally 
perform the function of bookkeeper in coordination with the 
treasurer.

e.  Maintain the registration list of eligible voters by districts 
and tribe and keep a record of all ballots mailed out and 
those returned.

f.  Publish a monthly tribal newsletter subject to the availa

bility of budgeted funds and in a form suitable to the business 
committee, but to include a copy of the proposed and approved 
budget, notice of meetings and elections, a list of candidates 
and election results, and a brief report of tribal council and 
business committee meetings and trip reports.

Provide for the minutes of all tribal council and all business 
committee meetings and prepare same for the secretary to 
certify as to accuracy. Minutes shall indicate the vote of each 
member of the business committee on each resolution.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - OATH OF OFFICE

 
 Each member of the business committee and each officer or subordinate 
officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of office prior to 
assuming the duties thereof. The oath of office shall be as follows:

, do hereby solemnly affirm
 
 

I, 
 
 that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States 
against all enemies and will carry out faithfully and impartially 
the duties of my office to the best of my ability and will promote 
and protect the best interests of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes in 
accordance with the Constitution and By-Laws of the Cheyenne- 
Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Regular monthly meetings of the business committee shall be held 
on the first Saturday of each month at the tribal headquarters , unless it falls 
on a legal holiday; and, in such event, it will be held on the following Saturday. 
Such meetings shall be open to the public.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the business committee may be called at the 
discretion of the chairman and shall be called by him upon written request of 
five (5) of its members or upon receipt of a petition signed by two hundred and 
fifty (250) members of the tribal council. Written request by the petitioners 
shall state the object of the meeting, and no other business shall be transacted 
until that specified in the request has been fully disposed of. A 30-day notice 

of said meeting requested by the petitioners shall be published in the tribal 
newsletter and/or other appropriate newspapers and posted at tribal 
headquarters and at the Concho Agency. Special meetings of the business 
committee shall not exceed one (1) a month at tribal expense. Such meetings 
shall be open to the public .

Sec. 3. An annual meeting of the tribal council shall be held on the first 
Saturday in October of each year. The meeting place will be designated by 
the business committee. One-half (1/2) of the meeting time available shall 
be reserved for tribal business from the floor.

Sec. 4. Special meetings of the tribal council may be called at the discre
tion of the chairman of the business committee, but shall be called by him upon 
written request of five (5) of the elected members of the committee, or upon 
receipt of a petition signed by two hundred fifty (250) members of the tribal 
council. A 30-day notice of this meeting must be published in the tribal 
newsletter and/or other appropriate newspapers and posted at tribal 
headquarters and at the Concho Agency. One-half (1/2) of the meeting 
time available shall be reserved for tribal business from the floor.

Sec. 5. The regular monthly meeting of the business committee for the 
months of March and September shall include an agenda item for the business 
committee to counsel with the tribal chiefs regarding the needs and welfare 
of the tribes and individual members thereof. Each tribal chief shall receive 
an invitation to be present at these meetings.

Sec. 6. Sub-committee meetings as required shall be held in the a.m. 
prior to business committee meetings .

Sec. 7. Each meeting of the tribal council and of the business committee 
shall be conducted pursuant to Robert's Rules of Order (Revised) , except when 
said rules are in conflict with this constitution and by-laws.

Sec. 8. Other meetings requiring representation of the tribes may be 
attended by one member of the business committee; and when deemed 
necessary, a second member of the business committee and/or one additional 
person other than a member of the business committee may attend at tribal 
expense. The delegate or delegates shall be selected by the business 
committee. Official travel will be covered from tribal funds , and per diem 
shall be determined pursuant to subsection c of Section 5 of Article TV of 
this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - RATIFICATION

 
 This constitution and by-laws shall be effective when approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the Indians 
of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes voting at an election authorized by the 
Secretary of the Interior under regulations which he may prescribe pursuant 
to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved APRIL 3, 1974, by 
La Follette Butler
Acting Deputy 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the attached Revised

Constitution and Bylaws of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma 

was submitted for ratification to the adult members of the Cheyenne- 

Arapaho Tribes , and was on April 19, 1975, duly ratified by a vote 

of 480 for, and 226 against, in an election in which a majority 

of those who voted cast their ballots in favor of it in accord with Article VII 

of the tribal constitution and Section 3 of the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 

1967).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, n. .terio, r 

y

of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to 

me by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967) , do hereby approve the

foregoing Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Cheyenne-Arapaho

Tribes of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended:

Washington, D. C.

Date: APR 3 - 1974

United States Department of the Interior
 
  
  
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

 
 Concho Agency

Concho, Oklahoma 73022 
 

MEMORANDUM

 
 To:

Area Director, Anadarko Area Office

From:

Superintendent, Concho Agency

Subject: Tribal Council Resolution No. 10 dated June 5, 1976 - 

Correction to Designation of District Boundaries of 

Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes

Attached is copy of Resolution adopted at the Special Meeting 
of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma held on June 5, 1976, 
whereby the designation of district boundaries set forth and 
described in Section 1 of Article VI of the Constitution and 
By-laws of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma were corrected 
pursuant to authority contained in subparagraph g. of Section 1 
of Article IV and Section 2 of Article VI of said Constitution.

Please forward to appropriate offices of the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs and United States Department of the Interior.

For your information, the Cheyenne and Arapaho Election Board 
is proceeding to carry out the first election as called for in 
the current Constitution and By-laws.

Superintendent
 
 

CHEYENNE-ARAPAHO TRIBES OF OKLAHOMA

TRIBAL COUNCIL MEETING

 
 Special Meeting of June 5, 1976

Tribal Council Resolution

No. 10

WHEREAS, it appears that the designation of dis

tricts set forth and described in Section 1 of Article VI of 

the Constitution and By-Laws of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of 

Oklahoma ratified April 19, 1975 (hereinafter called the 

"Revised Constitution"), are indefinite, uncertain and in

complete due to various references therein to the "North 

Canadian River" and to the "Red River," and

WHEREAS, in view of the foregoing, the Election 

Board previously selected to conduct the first election under 

the Revised Constitution did on October 22, 1975, declare all 

actions taken to that date in connection with said election to 

be null and void and did also' suspend further action in con

nection with the holding of said first election under the 

Revised Constitution until such time as the discrepancies in 

connection with the designation of districts are properly 

resolved, and

WHEREAS, the Tribal Council has the authority in 

Tribal Council Meetings to correct said discrepancies in the 

designation of districts pursuant to the provisions of sub

paragraph g. of Section 1 of Article IV and Section 2 of 

Article VI of the Revised Constitution, and

WHEREAS, the Tribal Council is duly convened this 

date for the purpose of correcting said discrepancies, and

WHEREAS, it appears that the discrepancies in the 

designation of districts in said Revised Constitution can be 

appropriately corrected by deleting in provision numbers 1, 2, 

3 and 4 of sub-paragraph A. of Section 1 of Article VI of the 

Revised Constitution all references to the "North Canadian 

River" and substituting therefor the "South Canadian River" 

and by further deleting from provision number 4 thereof the 

references to the "Red River" and substituting therefor the 

"North Fork of the Red River",

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, that the boundaries 

of the Cheyenne districts and the Arapaho districts set forth 

and described in the Revised Constitution are hereby altered 

and realigned by amending provision numbers 1, 2, 3 and 4 of 

sub-paragraph A. of Section 1 of Article VI of the Revised 

Constitution to read as follows:

1.  The Seiling, Watonga, and Longdale District 
shall begin at a point located at the north
west corner of Kingfisher County, thence 
south to the north boundary line of Canadian 
County, thence west to the northwest corner 
of Canadian County, thence north three 
miles, thence west eight miles, thence south 
three miles, thence west nine miles, more or 
less, to an intersection with the South 
Canadian River, thence northwestwardly along 
the course of the South Canadian River 
through Blaine, Custer, Dewey, and Ellis 
Counties, to the west boundary of the Concho 
Agency area, thence north to the northwest 
corner of the Concho Agency area, thence 
east along the north line of the Concho 
Agency area to the place or point of begin
ning.

2.  The Kingfisher, El Reno, and Calumet Dis

trict shall begin at a point located at the 
northwest corner of Kingfisher County on the 
north boundary of the Concho Agency area, 
thence south to the north boundary line of 
Canadian County, thence west to the north
west corner of Canadian County, thence north 
three miles, thence west eight miles, thence 
south three miles, thence west nine miles, 
more or less, to an intersection with the 
South Canadian River, thence southeastwardly 
along the course of the South Canadian River 
to the southeast corner of the Concho Agency 
area, thence north along the east boundary 

of the Concho Agency area to an intersection 
with Interstate Highway 40, thence east 
along Interstate Highway 40 a distance of 
four miles, thence north a distance of five 
miles, thence west to the east line of the 
Concho Agency area, thence north along the 
east line of the Concho Agency area to a 
point three miles south of U.S. Highway 33, 
thence east to a point two miles east of 
U.S. Highway 81, thence north a distance of 
five miles, thence west to the east boundary 
of the Concho Agency area, thence north 
along the east border of the Concho Agency 
area to the north border of the Concho 
Agency area, thence west to the place or 
point of beginning.

3.  The Thomas, Deer Creek, Weatherford, and 

Clinton District shall begin at the inter
section of the South Canadian River and the 
east line of Custer County, thence southerly 
along the east line of Custer and Washita 
Counties to the southeast corner of Washita 
County, thence westwardly along the south’ 
line of the Concho Agency area to a point 
six miles west of U.S. Highway 183, thence 
northerly along a line six miles west and 
parallel to U.S. Highway 183 to an inter
section with the South Canadian River, 
thence eastwardly along the course of the 
South Canadian River to the place or point 
of beginning.

4.  The Hammon and Elk City District shall begin 
at a point on the south line of Washita 
County six miles west of U.S. Highway 183, 
thence west along the south line of Washita 
and Beckham Counties to the North Fork of 
the Red River, thence northwestwardly along 
the course of the North Fork of the Red 
River and the Concho Agency area to the west 
line of the Concho Agency area, thence north 
along the west line of the Concho Agency 
area to an intersection with the South 
Canadian River, thence eastwardly along the 
course of the South Canadian River to a 
point six miles west of U.S. Highway 183, 
thence southerly along a line six miles west 
of and parallel to U.S. Highway 183 to the 
place or point of beginning.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that duly executed and 

certified copies of this Resolution shall be promptly trans

mitted to the Election Board and to the Business Committee of 

the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma and to the Superinten

dent of the Concho Agency for his transmittal through appro

priate channels of the Bureau of Indian Affairs and of the 

Department of the Interior.
 
 

TRIBAL COUNCIL OF THE CHEYENNE- 
ARAPAHO TRIBES OF OKLAHOMA

CERTIFICATION

 
 This is to certify that the above and foregoing 

Resolution was duly adopted at a duly noticed, convened and 

held Special Meeting of the Tribal Council of the Cheyenne- 

Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma held at Watonga, Oklahoma on the 

5th day of June, 1976, at which 75 or more members were pre

sent, constituting a quorum, and that said Resolution has not 

been amended nor rescinded in any way.

