 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND  BY-LAWS OF THE CHEYENNE 
 

RIVER  SIOUX  TRIBE  OF  SOUTH  DAKOTA

 
 Eagle Butte, South Dakota

Approved  December 27,  1935

Amended February  11,  1966

We,  the  Sioux Indians  of  the Cheyenne River Reservation  in  the State  of  South Da-
kota  in  order to establish our  tribal  organization, to conserve  our  tribal property,
to develop  our common resources,  to establish justice, and  to promote  the welfare  of
ourselves  and our descendants,  do hereby ordain and  establish this  constitution and
by-laws  for ourtribal council as  a guide  to  its  deliberations.
 
 

ARTICLE  I  -

TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction  of the Cheyenne River Reservation Sioux Tribe of  Indians  shall  ex-
tend to the  territory within the  original confines  of the  diminished reservation boun-
daries, which are  described by  the act of March 2, 1889  (25  Stat,  L. 888),  and  includ-
ing trust allotments without  the  herein mentioned boundaries and  such  other  lands as
may  be hereafter  added thereto under any law  of the  United States, except  as  otherwise
provided for by  law,
 
 

ARTICLE  II  -

MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1.  The membership  of the Cheyenne River  Sioux Tribe  shall consist  of  the

following:

(a) All persons  of  Indian blood whose names appear  on  the  official census roll of

the  tribe  as of  June 18, 1934.

(b) All children born  to any  member of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe who is  a re-

sident  of the  reservation at  the time  of  the  birth of  said children.

SEC,  2.  The  tribal  council shall  have  the  power:

(a) To admit persons  of Cheyenne River Sioux Indian blood  to membership upon a two-

thirds  (2/3)  vote  of the  tribal council.

(b) To  strike from the  census rolls  of  the Cheyenne  River Sioux Tribe  any person

who makes  application to  sever his  tribal  relations  and  thereafter such person  shall
cease  to be a member of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe  of  Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE  III  -

GOVERNING  BODY

 
 SECTION 1.  The  governing body  of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe shall  consist of a

council,  known as  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribal Council.

SEC.  2.  The  governing body  under this constitution  and by-laws  shall  be  composed

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-2-

of one  (1) tribal chairman,  one  (1) tribal  secretary, and  one  (1) tribal  treasurer;
also fifteen  (15)  councilmen and  such offices  as  from time to time may  be  created by
the  tribal  council.

SEC.  3.  The  tribal chairman,  the  tribal secretary,  and the  tribal  treasurer
shall  be  elected at  large by  popular vote;  councilmen  shall  be elected  from each  dis
trict  or political  subdivision of  the reservation  by  the  legal  voters residing with-
in  the  district  or precinct  from which  such councilman is  to be  elected.  There
shall  be  thirteen (13)  districts  or voting precincts  as hereinafter described  in ar-
ticle  III,  section 4 of  the by-laws,  Councilmen shall be  apportioned by  and  from
each  district  or voting precinct  of  the  reservation  as  follows:

1. Agency precinct,  which shall  include  the Agency  Swiftbird  1, and Shepard Bot-

tom communities:  One  (1) delegate.

2. Bridger precinct,  which shall  include  the Bridger  communityj  One  (1) delegate.

3, Cherry Creek precinct, which shall  include  the Cherry Creek community:  One  (1)

delegate.

4,  Red Scaffold precinct,  which shall  include  the Red Scaffold community:  Two  (2)

delegates,

5. Eagle  Butte precinct, which  shall  include  the Eagle Butte community:  One  (1)

delegate,

6,  Four  Bear precinct, which shall  include  the  Four  Bear community:  One  (1) dele-

gate.

7.  Green  Grass  precinct,  which  shall  include  the  Bear  Creek,  Green  Grass,  and

Sans  Arc  communities:  One  (1)  delegate.

8. Lantry  precinct, which shall  include  the  Upper  Bear Creek community:  One  (1)

delegate.

9,  La  Plant precinct, which shall  include  the La Plant  and Ridgeview communities:

Two  (2)  delegates.

10. Promise precinctzwhich shall  include  the Promise community:  One  (1) delegate.
11.  Robertson precinct, which  shall  include  the Black Feet  and Swift  Bird  II  com-

munities:  One  (1) delegate.

12. Thunder  Butte  precinet, which  shall  include  the  Iron  Lightning and East Thund-

er Butte communities:  One  (1) delegate.

13.  White Horse precincts  which  shall  include  the White Horse and the  Black Tongue

communities:  One  (1) delegate.

Provided:  That the  Cheyenne River Tribal Council  shall  have  the power both to  re-
district  the  reservation and  its  precincts and to  reassign  the  number of councilmen
to be  elected from each  district  in proportion to  the number  of  qualified voters  re
siding therein,  or on a population basis.

SEC,  4.  The  officers and councilmen provided  for in  section 2 of  this  article

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-3-

shall  be elected  for  the  following term  of  office;  general  elections will be  held
every  two years  on  the  first Tuesday  after  the  first Monday  in the month  of  Septem-
ber.

(a) The  tribal chairman,  tribal  secretary,  and the  tribal  treasurer first elected
shall  each  serve  until  October 1, 1938;  thereafter the  term  of  office for  these  offi-
cials  shall  be  four years.

(b) The councilmen elected at the  first  general election  in  no. 1, agency  district
or precinct;  no. 2, Bridger  district  or  precinct;  one  councilman from no, 4, Red Scaf
fold  district  or  precinct;  no, 7, Green Grass  district  or precinct;  one  councilman
from no, 9,  La Plant  district  or precinct;  no, 11,  Robertson district  or precinct;
and no, 13,  White Horse  district  or precinct  shall  be elected  and hold  office until
October 1, 1938, when there  shall  be a general  election for  councilmen in  these dis-
tricts;  thereafter councilmen  shall hold  office  for  a term of  four  (4) years.

(c) All other councilmen  elected at  the  first  general election from the no. 3,
Cherry Creek  district  or precinct;  one  councilman  from no, 4, Red Scaffold district
or precinct;  no, 5, Eagle  Butte district  or precinct;  no, 6, Four Bear district  or
precinct;  no, 8, Lantry  district  or  precinct;  one councilman  from  no,  9,  La  Plant  dis
trict  or  precinct;  no. 10, Promise district  or  precinct;  and no, 12,  Thunder  Butte
district  or precinct  shall  hold  office  until  October 1, 1940;  thereafter councilmen
shall hold  office  for a term  of  four  (4) years.

SEC.  5.  The  first election  of  the  tribal council  members  shall  be held on  call  of
the  provisional committee, which shall  consist  of  twenty-six (26)  members of  the Chez
enne River Sioux Tribe  of  Indians,  two  (2) from each  of  the  voting precincts  on  said
reservation  on October 2 7 , 1934, and  five  Indian Service employees, which committee
the  superintendent  of said  reservation may  appoint  to supervise the  election of  offi-
cers  and councilmen, within  thirty  (30) days  after  this  constitution and  by-laws has
been approved by  the Secretary  of  the  Interior,

SEC.  6.  This committee  shall  issue  its certificate of  election to the persons  re-
ceiving the highest  number  of  votes  in each district  in accordance with the  quota as-
signed hereby  to each of  said districts provided  for  in article  III,  section 3.

The officers and councilmen so elected and certified to shall  report  at the Chey-
enne River  Agency within ten days  after the election and take  the  oath of  office.  The
reservation  superintendent shall  administer the  oath  of office.

Said officers  and councilmen  shall convene within thirty  (30) days  after the  elec-
tion  and  organize for business  and elect  one  assistant chairman from their  own member
ship.

SEC.  7.  The tribal  council  shall  have  supervision and authority  over all  subse-

quent elections as  provided through by-laws  or resolutions  hereafter enacted.
 
 

ARTICLE  IV -

POWERS  OF  SELF-GOVERNMENT

 
 SECTION 1.  The  tribal council  of  the Cheyenne River Reservation shall exercise
the  following powers vested  in  the present council under existing laws  or conferred
by  the  act of  June 18,  1934  (48  Stat.  984)  and acts  amendatory  thereof  or  supplement-
al  thereto, subject  to any limitations  imposed  by the  statutes  or  the Constitution of
the  United States,  and subject  further to all  express  restrictions upon such powers
contained  in  this  constitution and the  attached by-laws.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-4-

(a) To enter  into negotiations with  the Federal, State, and  local Governments  on

behalf  of  the tribe.

(b) To present  and prosecute  any claims  or demands  of the  Cheyenne River Sioux
Tribe  of  Indians.  It  shall have the right  to assist members  of  the tribe  in  present
ing their claims  and grievances before  any  court or agency  of  government.  It  shall
have  the  right  to employ  attorneys  of  record  or  representatives  for such  services,
the choice of counsel  and  fixing of  fees  to be  subject  to the approval of  the Secre-
tary  of  the  Interior.

(c) To approve  or  veto any  sale, disposition, lease  or  encumbrance  of  tribal
lands,  interests  in  land  or  other  tribal assets which may  be authorized or executed
by  the  Secretary of  the  Interior,  the Commissioner  of  Indian Affairs,  or  any  other
official  or agency of  government, provided that  no tribal  lands  shall  ever be  sold,
except  those  tribal  lands  located outside  of  the  Cheyenne River Reservation boundary,
and  outside  of  the Consolidation Area boundary  lines  established as  of  the  date  of
the  approval  of  Public Law 88-418  (August 11,  1964),  and  set  out  in tribal  council
action  by Resolution No. 92-64  (September 2, 1964).  Tribal  lands maynot be encum-
bered  or leased for a period exceeding five years, except  as  provided for  in Article
VIII,  Section 3.

(d) To confer with the Secretary  of  the  Interior  upon all appropriation estimates
or  Federal  projects for  the benefit  of  the tribe  prior to the  submission  of  such es-
timates  to the  Bureau of  Budget  and Congress.

(e) To  receive voluntary relinquishments  of  allotments and heirship lands  and  to

make  assignments of tribal  land to members  of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Reservation
in  conformity with article VIII  of  this constitution,

(f) To  select  subordinate boards,  officials,  and employees  not  otherwise provided

for  in  this constitution and  to prescribe their  tenure and  duties  and to establish
district  councils;  to authorize and establish any association or  organization having
for  its  purpose and  sole  object  the  benefit of  the  members  of  the  Cheyenne River
Sioux Tribe.  Such association or  organization shall  have the  right  to engage  in col
lective  or  cooperative bargaining or marketing, or purchasing of  supplies,  crops,
equipment,  seed,  machinery, building or livestock, the  council  reserving the right
to establish ordinances covering  the  activities of  such association  or organization,
and to enforce  the  observance  of such  ordinances,

(g) To administer any funds  or property within the  control of  the tribe;  to make

expenditures from  available funds  for public purposes,  including salaries  or other
remuneration  of  tribal officials  or employees.  Such  salaries  or  remuneration shall
be  paid  only  for  services  actually  authorized  in  a  regular  and  legal  manner and ac-
tually  rendered.  All expenditures  from the  tribal council  fund shall  be by  resolu-
tion duly passed by  the council  to that  effect and  the amount  so paid  shall  be a mat
ter  of  public  record at all  times.

(h) The council  shall  have the power when just cause or  extreme  emergency exists,

which shall  create a hazard to the peace and  safety  of  the  tribe  as a whole  or  to
the  individual members  thereof, to  require the  individual members  of  the  tribe  or
other residents  upon  the reservation to assist with community  labor.

(i) To create  and maintain a tribal  council  fund by accepting grants  or  donations

from  any person, State,  or  the  United  States, or by  levying assessments  of  not  less
than  ten cents, and  not  to  exceed one  dollar ($1.00) per year,  per capita  on  the  qua

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-5-

lified voters  of the  Cheyenne River  Sioux Tribe,  and  to require  the performance of
community  labor  in  lieu thereof, provided the payment  of  such per capita  levy  shall
be made  before any  person  shall  vote  in  any  election held more  than six months  after
the date  of  said  levy;  and  to levy  taxes and  license  fees  subject to review by  the  Se
cretary  of  the  Interior, upon non-members  doing business with the reservation.  Any
money so collected shall  be disposed of  as  provided for  in  article  IV,  section 1(g)
of this  constitution.

(j) To provide  by  ordinance,  subject  to review by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,
for  removal  or  exclusion from the  territory of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe  of  any
non-members whose  presence may be  injurious  to the members  of  the  tribe morally  or
criminally.

(k)  To  promulgate ordinances  for  the purpose  of  safe-guarding the peace  and safety
of  residents  of  the  Cheyenne River Reservation, and  to  establish  courts  for  the adju-
dication of  claims or  disputes arising  among the members of  the  tribe and for  the
trial  and punishment  of members of  the  tribe  charged with  the  commission of offenses
set  forth  in  such ordinances.

(1) To purchase under  condemnation proceedings,  land  or other property  needed for

public purposes,  subject to  the  approval of  the  Secretary of  the  Interior.

(m) To protect  the  public  health and morals  and  to promote the public welfare by

regulating  the use and disposition of  property  of members  of  the  tribe.

(n) To regulate the  inheritance  of property,  real and personal,  other than allotted
lands,  within  the  territory  of  the  CheyenneRiver  Sioux  Reservation,  subject  to  review
by  the  Secretary of  the  Interior.

(o)  To  provide  by  ordinance  for  the  appointment  of  guardians  for  minors  and  mental

incompetents,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the Secretary  of  the  Interior.

(p)  To  adopt  resolutions  regulating  the procedure  of  the  council  itself and  of  oth

er tribal  agencies and tribal  officials of  the reservation.

SEC.  2.  Manner of  review, --Any resolution or  ordinance which, by the  terms  of
this  constitution,  is  subject  to review by  the Secretary  of  the  Interior, shall be
presented to the  superintendent  of  the  reservation, who shall,  within ten  (10) days
thereafter, approve  or  disapprove the same.  If  the  superintendent  shall  approve any
ordinance  or resolution,  it  shall  thereupon  become effective, but  the  superintendent
shall  transmit a copy  of the  same, bearing his  endorsement,  to the  Secretary  of  the
Interior, who may  within ninety  (90) days  from the  date  of  enactment, rescind  the  said
ordinance  or resolution  for any  cause, by  notifying the  tribal  council  of  such res-
cission.

If  the  superintendent  shall refuse  to approve any  resolution or  ordinance submitted
to him, within  ten  days after  its enactment,  he shall  advise the  tribal  council  of  his
reasons  therefor.  If  these  reasons appear to the  tribal  council  insufficient,  it may,
by a majority popular  vote, refer the  ordinance  or  resolution to the  Secretary  of  the
Interior, who may,  within ninety  (90) days  from the  date  of  its  enactment, approve  the
same  in writing, whereupon the  said  ordinance  or resolution shall  become effective.

SEC.  3.  Future  powers.  -The  council  shall have  the power to act  on  such  other
necessary  or  emergency  cases  as  may be delegated  to the  tribe  by  the Secretary  of  the
Interior, or  by any other  official  or agency  of  the Government.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-6-

SEC.  4. Reserved powers. -The  foregoing enumeration  of powers  shall  not be con-
strued to limit  the powers  of  the  tribal  council,  but all  powers  of  local  government
not expressly entrusted to the  council  by this  constitution and by-laws  shall  be  re-
served to the  legal voters  of  the Cheyenne River Tribe.  Such powers may  be exercised
through appropriate  by-laws and  constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE V -

ELECTIONS AND NOMINATIONS

 
 SECTION  1.  All enrolled members  of  the Cheyenne River Tribe,  21  years  of  age  or
over, who have maintained  legal  residence  on  the reservation  for a period of  one year
immediately prior to any election shall  have the right  to vote.

SEC.  2.  No person shall  be  a candidate  for membership  in  the  tribal  or district

council  or  other  tribal  office  unless  he  shall  be  a member of  the Cheyenne River
Sioux Tribe,  and shall  have resided for a period  of  one  year next preceding the elec-
tion in  the  district of  his  candidacy, and  he  shall  be over twenty-five  (25)  years  of
age.

SEC.  3.  Any member of  the  tribe may become a candidate for  any  office upon the
signed petition of  at  least  ten  (10)  legal voters  from the district where  he  is  de-
clared to be  a legal  resident,

Any  legal member of  the  tribe  shall  be considered a candidate  for  office when cer-

tified by  the  district council  or  other  authorized organization  of  the district pre-
senting his  candidacy.

SEC.  4,  When any  election  is  to be held  in any  or at all  the  districts,  thechair-

man of  the  tribal council  shall  appoint a superintendent of an  election in  each of
said  districts,  and the  superintendent so appointed  shall  have power to appoint  two
(2) judges  and two (2) ballot clerks,  which will  constitute the  election board.  The
duties  of  this  election board  shall  be  to supervise  the election.
 
 

ARTICLE  VI  -

REMOVAL  FROM  OFFICE

 
 SECTION  1.  If  any  officer or member  of the  tribal  council  shall  absent himself
from any  three  (3) consecutive regular  or special meetings without  sufficient reason,
the other members may declare  the  office vacant  by  two-thirds  (2/3)  vote of  the  coun-
cil.

SEC. 2.  Any  officer  or member of  the  tribal council convicted by  Federal,  State,

or  Indian court may be  removed  from office by  two-thirds  (2/3)  vote  of  the council.

SEC.  3.  If  any vacancies  occur  in  the membership  of  the  tribal council  through
resignation,  recall,  impeachment,  or death, the  district council  wherein he resides
and  is elected  from  shall proceed to elect a new councilman to finish the  unexpired
term of  such member.

SEC. 4.  Recall.  -Every  person elected to a tribal  office by  the  Sioux  Indians  of

the Cheyenne River  Indian Reservation  is  subject  to recall  from such office  upon pe-
tition of  40%  of  the electors  of  the reservation,  or  the district or  voting precinct,
qualified to vote  for  such office,  but  no recall  election shall  be held without  the
approval of  the council,

SEC.  5.  The ballot  used at  such election shall  contain the  question:  "Shall

be recalled from  office  on  the Cheyenne River Tribal Council?"  and shall  con-

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-7-

tain a space  opposite  such question,  in which  shall  appear the words  "Yes-No", and
the  voter shall  indicate  by making a mark as  to whether he wishes  to vote  for  or
against  the  recall  of  the member so named.

SEC.  6.  No member  of  the  council  shall  take part  in  the deliberations  of  the
council,  nor shall he have a vote  in balloting upon  any matter pertaining  to any  re-
call election or  the  results  thereof when such member  shall  be the  one whom it  is
proposed  to  recall.
 
 

ARTICLE  VII  -

REFERENDUM

 
 SECTION  1.  Upon  a  petition  of  at  least  three  hundred  (300)  qualified  voters  of
the Cheyenne  River Sioux Reservation a referendum may be  demanded  on any  enacted  or
proposed  ordinance  or resolution of  the Cheyenne River  Sioux Tribal Council, and  the
vote  of  the  majority  of  the  qualified  voters  in  such  referendum  shall  be  conclusive
and  binding  on the  tribal  council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII -

LAND

 
 SECTION  1.  Allotted  lands. -Allotted  lands,  including heirship  lands,  within  the

Cheyenne River Reservation shall  continue to be  held as  heretofore by  their present
owners.  It  is  recognized that under existing  law such lands may  be  condemned for
public purposes,  such as  roads,  public  buildings,  or other public improvements,  upon
payment  of  adequate compensation, by  any  agency  of  the  State  of South  Dakota or of
the Federal Government,  or by  the  tribe  itself.  It  is  further recognized  that under
existing  law such  lands  may be  inherited by  the heirs  of  the  present  owner,  whether
or  not they  are members  of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe.  Likewise  it  is  recogniz-
ed that  under existing law  the Secretary  of  the  Interior may, in his discretion, re-
move restrictions  upon  such land, upon application by  the  Indian  owner, whereupon
the  land will  become subject to State  taxes  and may  then be mortgaged or  sold.

The  right  of  the  individual  Indian to hold  or  to part with his  land,  as  under
existing law, shall  not  be abrogated by  anything contained  in  this constitution,  but
the  owner  of  restricted land  may, with the approval  of  the Secretary  of  the  Interior,
voluntarily convey his  land  to the  Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe either  in  exchange for
a money payment or  in exchange  for  an assignment covering the  same  land or  other
land, as  hereinafter provided.

SEC.  2.  Tribal  lands.  -The  unallotted lands  of  the Cheyenne River Reservation
and all  lands which may hereafter be  acquired by  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe  or
by  the  United States  in  trust for  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe  shall  be  held as  tri
bal  lands,  and  no part  of  such lands  shall  be  sold,  except  those tribal  lands  located
outside  of  the Cheyenne River Reservation boundaries,  and outside  of  the Consolida-
tion Area boundary  lines  established as  of  the  date of  the approval  of Public Law  88-
418  (August 11,  1964),  and set  out  in tribal council  action by Resolution No. 92-64
(September 2, 1964).  Tribal  lands  shall not  be mortgaged, nor allotted to  individual
Indians,  but may be assigned  to members  of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe  or  leased
or  otherwise used by  the  tribe,  as hereinafter provided.

SBC.  3.  Leasing  of  tribal lands.  -Tribal  lands may  be leased by  the tribal  coun-
cil, with the approval  of  the Secretary of  the  Interior for public,  religious, educa-
tional,  recreational, residential,  or business purposes  for a period not to  exceed  25
years  and  may  include  a  provision  authorizing  a  renewal  or  an  extension  for  one  ad-
ditional  term  of  not to exceed 25  years,  but no one  lease  or  contract shall  be  for a
tract  in excess of  160 acres.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-8-

Grazing  permits covering tribal land may be  issued  by  the  tribal council,  with  the

approval  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.  Such  grazing permits  shall not  exceed a
term  of  five  years.

In  the  leasing  of  tribal  lands  and  the  issuance  of  grazing  permits  preference

to  Indian  cooperative  associations,  and,  secondly,  to  individual
shall  be  given  first 
Indians,  who  are  members  of  the  Cheyenne  River  Sioux  Tribe.  No  lease  of  tribal  land
to  a  non-member  or  the  issuance  of  a  grazing  permit  to  a  non-member  shall  be  made  by
the  tribal  council  unless  it  shall  appear  that  no  Indian  cooperative  association  or
individual  member  of  the  tribe  is  able  and willing to use the  land  and  to pay  a rea-
sonable  fee  of  such  use,

SEC,  4.  Grant of  "standard"  assignments. -In  any  assignment  of  tribal  lands
which are now owned  by the  tribe  or which hereafter may be  acquired for  the  tribe by
the  United States  or purchased by  the  tribe  out  of  tribal  funds,  preference shall  be
given,  first  to heads  of  families which are  entirely  landless,  and,  secondly,  to
heads  of  families which have no allotted lands  or  interests  in allotted  lands  but
shall  have already  received assignments consisting of  less  than an  economic unit  of
agricultural  land, or  other land  or  interests  in  land  of equal  value, such unit  to be
determined from time  to time  by the  tribal council.

The  tribal council  may,  if  it  sees  fit,  charge a fee  of  not to exceed $25  on  ap-

proval  of  an assignment made  under this  section,

Assignments made under this  section  shall be  for the  primary  purpose of  establish-

ing homes  for  landless  Indians,  and shall  be known as  "standard"  assignments.

SEC.  5.  Tenure  of  "standard" assignments. -If  any member of  the  tribe holding a

"standard" assignment  of  land  shall,  for  a period of  two (2) years,  fail  to use the
land so assigned, his  assignment may  be cancelled by  the  tribal council after  due no-
tice and  an opportunity  to be heard,  and  the  said  land,  may be  reassigned  in accord-
ance with the  provisions of  section 4 of  this  article.

Upon  the  death  of  any  Indian  holding  a  "standard"  assignment  his  heirs  or  other  in
dividuals  designated  by  him,  by  will  or  by  written  request  shall  have  a  preference  in
the  reassignment  of  the  land,  provided  such persons  are members  of  the Cheyenne River
Sioux Tribe who would be eligible  to receive  a  "standard"  assignment.

SEC.  6.  Grant  of  "exchange" assignment. -Any  member  of  the  tribe who  owns  an al-

lotment  or  any  share  of  heirship  land may  voluntarily  transfer his  interest  in  such
land  in exchange  for  any assignment  to the  same  land or  other  land  of equal value.  If
the assignee prefers,  he may  receive,  in  lieu of  a specific  tract  of  land,  a proport-
ionate  share  in  a  larger  grazing  unit.

Assignments made under this  section shall  be  known as  "exchange" assignments.

SEC.  7.  Leasing  of  "exchange"  assignments. 
 
 

-

 
 "Exchange"  assignments  may  be  used

by  the  assignee  or leased by  him to  Indian  cooperative associations, to  individual
members  of  the  tribe,  or,  if no individual  Indian  or  Indian cooperative association
is  able  and willing to rent the  land at  a reasonable fee,  such assignments  may  be
leased to  non-Indians,  in  the same manner as  allotted lands.

SEC,  8,  Inheritance  of  "exchange"l assignments. -

Upon  the  death  of  the holder  of
any  "exchange" assignment,  such land  shall  be  reassigned by  the  tribal council  to  his
heirs  or  devisees,  subject  to the following conditions:

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-9.-

(a) Such lands  may not be reassigned  to any  heirs  or  devisees who are not members

of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, except  that a life assignment may be  made  to the
surviving widower  or widow of  the holder  of assignment.

(b) Such  lands may  not be  reassigned to any  heirs  or devisees who already hold
more  than  a  certain  number  of  acres  of  grazing  land,  or  other  land  or  interests  in
land  of  equal  value,  either  under  allotment  or  under  assignment,  such  amounts  to  be
determined  from  time  to time  by  the  council.

(c)  Such  lands  may  not  be  subdivided  among  heirs  or  devisees  into  units  too  small

for convenient management.  No area of  grazing land shall  be subdivided into  units
smaller  than  sixty  (60) acres,  and no area  of agricultural  land  shall  be subdivided
into units smaller  than  two and  one-half acres,  except  that  land  used for buildings
or  other  improvements may  be  divided to suit  the conveniences  of  the  parties.  Where
it  is  impossible  to divide  the  land properly among  the eligible  heirs  or deviseesthe
tribal  council  shall  issue  to such heirs  or  devisees  grazing permits  or  other  inter-
ests  in  tribal  lands  of  the  same value as  the assignments  of  the decedent.

(d) If there  are  no eligible heirs  or devisees  of  the  decedent,  the  land  shall  be
eligible for  reassignment  in accordance with the provisions  of  section 4 of  this  ar-
ticle.

SEC.  9. 

Inheritance  of  improvements.  -Improvements 

of  any  character  made  upon  as
signed  land  may  be  bequeathed  to  and  inherited  by  members  of  the  Cheyenne  River  Sioux
Tribe  or  otherwise  disposed  of  under  such  regulations  as  the  tribal  council  shall  pro
vide.  No permanent improvements  shall  be  removed from the land without  the consent
of the tribal council.

SEC,  10, 

Assignments may be exchanged between members
of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe  by  common consent  in  such manner as  the  tribal coun
cil  shall  designate,

Exchange of  assignments. -

SEC.  11.  Use  of  unassigned  tribal  land.  -Tribal 

in-
cluding tribal  timber  reserves, shall  be managed by  the  tribal council  for the  bene-
fit  of  the members  of  the entire tribe,  and any  cash income derived  from such land
shall  accrue  to the  benefit  of  the tribe  as  a whole.

land  which  is  not  assigned, 

SEC.  12.  Purchase  of land by  the  tribe. -Tribal  funds may  be used with the  con-

sent  of  the  Secretary of  the  Interior,  to acquire  land, under  the following condi-
tions:

(a) Land within  the Cheyenne River Reservation or  adjacent  to the boundaries
thereof  which is  not now  in  Indian  ownership  may  be  purchased  by  or  for  the  Cheyenne
River  Tribe.

(b)  Restricted  land,  which  is 

in  heirship  status  at  the  time  of  the  adoption  and

approval  of  this constitution, may be  purchased by  or  for  the  tribe, with  the consent
of  all  the  adult heirs,  and  the  legal guardians  of minor heirs,  payment  therefor  to
be made  as may be  agreed upon.

(c) Land  owned by  any member of the  tribe who is  over the  age of  sixty  (60) years,

or who is  physically incapacitated, may be  transferred by  its  owner to the  tribe in
exchange for  a pension of not more  than twice the  usual  rental value of  the  land for
the  life  of the pensioner,  to be paid  out  of  available tribal  funds.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-10-

(d) Land  in  excess of  320 acres  owned  by  any  member of  the  tribe may be  purchased
by  the tribe, with the consent  of the  owner, payments to be made  under  such terms  as
may  be  agreed  upon.

(e) Land owned  by  any member  of the tribe who desires  to leave  the  reservation
permanently may be purchased by the  tribe,  under  such terms as  may be agreed upon.

SEC,  13.  Method  of making assignments,  --Applications  for assignment  shall be
filed with the  secretary  of  the council  and  shall  be  in writing, setting forth  the
name of  the person  or persons  applying for  the  land and as  accurate a description  of
the  land desired as  the  circumstances will permit,  Notices  of all applications  re-
ceived by the  secretary shall  be posted by him in the  agency office  and  in at  least
three conspicuous places  in  the  district in which the  land  is  located  for not less
than twenty  (20) days  before  action is  taken by  the council,  Any member of  the  tribe
wishing  to oppose the  granting of  an assignment shall  do so  in writing, setting forth
his  objections, to be  filed with  the secretary  of  the council,  and may  if he  so de-
sires  appear before  the council  to present evidence.  The  secretary of  the council
shall  furnish the  superintendent  or  other  officers  in charge  of  the  agency,  a com-
plete record  of  all action taken  by  the council  on  applications  for assignment  of
land,  and a complete record of  assignments shall  be  kept  in the  agency  office and
shall  be  open  for  inspection by  members  of  the  tribe.

The council  shall  draw  up  one  or more  forms  for  standard and exchange assignments,

which shall be  subject  to the  approval  of  the Secretary  of  the  Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE 

IX  -

AMENDMENTS

 
 SECTION  1.  This  constitution  and  the  appended  by-laws  may  be  amended  by  a  major-

ity  of  the qualified voters of  the  tribe voting at an election called for  that pur-
pose by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior, provided  that at  least  30 per cent  of  those
entitled  to vote  shall vote  in  such election;  but no amendment shall  become  effective
until  it  shall  have  been approved by  the Secretary  of  the  Interior.

SEC.  2.  It  shall  be the  duty  of  the Secretary  of  the  Interior, upon presentation
of a petition  signed by  at  least  two hundred  (200) legal voters of  the  tribe, and up-
on  request by  the council, to call an  election  on any  proposed  amendment.


BY-LAWS  OF  THE  CHEYENNE  RIVER  SIOUX  TRIBE  OF  SOUTH  DAKOTA

ARTICLE  I  -

DUTIES  OF  OFFICERS


SECTION  1, 

It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  chairman to preside at all meetings  of  the

council,  He shall  have  a vote  only when a tie  occurs.

SEC.  2,  In the  absence  of  the  regular chairman  the assistant  chairman shall  pre-

side  and he  shall  have all powers,  privileges, and  duties  of  the  regular chairman,
and may  cast a vote  in the case  of  a tie.

SEC. 3, 

It  shall be  the  duty of  the  tribal secretary  to keep a true and accurate

record of  all matters  affecting the  tribal  records and accounts,  and  to render a pro-
per  accounting  of  such  records and statistics as  are required  by the  tribal  council.
He  shall be  present at  all meetings  of  the council  and shall keep  an accurate record

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-11-

of all  council proceedings,  including the  minutes  of  each special and regular meet-
ings.

(a) Minutes  of  all  special  or  regular meetings  shall  be in  triplicate,  the  original
copy to be  filed at  the Cheyenne Agency Tribal Office, one  copy to be presented to the
superintendent,  and one  copy to be  transmitted to the Commissioner  of  Indian Affairs.

(b) The  secretary  shall have voice  in the  deliberations  of the  council,  but  shall

not vote.

SEC,  4.  The duties  of  the  treasurer of  the  tribal council  shall  be as  follows:  He
shall  accept,  receive,  receipt for,  preserve,  and safeguard all  funds  in  the  custody
of  the council, whether same  be  tribal  funds  or  special  funds  for which the  council
is  acting as  trustee  or  custodian.  He  shall deposit  all such  funds  in  such bank or
elsewhere, as  directed by  the council,  and he  shall  keep  an accurate record, filing
Same  in the tribal council's  office,  and he shall  report all receipts and expenditures
and accounts  and the nature  of all  funds  in his  possession or custody,  once every six
months  to the tribal council  in writing, or at any  time he is  requested to do so by
the  tribal council.

(a) He  shall not  disburse any  funds  in his custody  belonging to the council except

when authorized by  a motion duly passed and properly  recorded by  the  council.

(b) He  shall  be present  at  all  special or  regular meetings of  the  council, but will
have no voice or  vote  in  the deliberations of the council, only  when making reports  or
to furnish  the necessary  information  required  by  the council.

(c) The treasurer  shall  be  required  to furnish a bond satisfactory to the council,

(d) The  books and records  of the  treasurer shall  be audited at  least  once  each year

by a competent  auditor employed  by  the  tribal council  or under the  direction of  the
Commissioner of  Indian Affairs,

SEC,  5,  There  shall  be a sergeant-at-arms and he will  be appointed by the  tribal

council.

(a) It  shall  be his  duty  to be present at all  meetings of  the  tribal  council, and
to maintain order and decorum within the  council chamber;  he shall  serve all  summon-
ses  emanating from the council, and shall  perform such other duties  as may be designat
ed by the  council,  He  shall have  no voice  or  vote in  the  deliberations  of the coun-
cil, except when making reports or furnishing information  requested by the  council.
 
 

ARTICLE II  -

QUALIFICATIONS  OF OFFICE

 
 Any person elected as  an officer  or councilmen must be a Sioux  Indian, enrolled  on
the Cheyenne  River Reservation, and over twenty-five  (25) years of age at  the  time of
his or her election,

(a) No  employee of the  Indian Service  shall  be elected  as an  officer or  councilman.

(b) No person convicted of  felony  shall be  elected as an  officer  or  councilman.

(c) The tribal  council  shall be  the  sole judge  of the qualifications  of  its  own

members.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-12-

(d) All  councilmen must be elected  from their  respective  districts,  and  be a resi-

dent of the  district  of which  they  are elected.
 
 

ARTICLE  III  -

DISTRICT OR PRECINCT ORGANIZATION, ELECTIONS, AND CERTIFICATION

 
 SECTION  1. Each voting precinct established under  this constitution  as  provided  in
article  III,  section  4, shall  elect  at the  first general  election and biannually there
after a president,  secretary, and  treasurer.  These  district officials  shall  hold  of-
fice  for  a term  of  two years,  The president  shall call  and preside  over all  councils
of  the community whenever  necessary for  the  consideration of matters  of local  interest
and may  exercise such further powers as  may be delegated to him by  the  tribal  council,
He  shall  file with the  tribal council  and certify all  nominations  for  office within
the precinct  and at  large,  according to section 3, article V of  this constitution. The
actions  of  the precinct  officers  shall  not  be inconsistent with the constitution and
by-laws  and  ordinances  of  the  tribe,  A  tribal councilman, in  addition to the  office
Of  tribal councilman, may hold any  of  these  district  offices  if elected  to such  office
by  the voters  of his district.

SEC.  2.  It  shall  be  the duty  of  the  district council  to see that all  nominations
for tribal  office,  including membership  in the  council,  shall be made  in strict  ac-
cord with the provisions  of the  constitution, and  to certify as  to the  legality  of
such nominations,  otherwise it  shall  be considered illegal and  ineffective  by  the  tri-
bal council.

SEC.  3.  All tribal  elections for  officers  shall  be canvassed and certified by the

council,  or a board appointed  by  them,  the results  of  such elections.  No candidate
shall be considered  legally elected, nor shall  he  hold  office until  such canvass  and
certification  shall have been made  by the council within five  (5) days  after such elec
tions.

SEC.  4,  All necessary details concerning tribal  nominations  and elections not spe-

cifically covered  in  these by-laws  or  in  the constitution, shall  be more  fully  set
forth  in  ordinances  to be hereafter established by the  council.

SEC.  5,  Each district  or voting precinct established under section  3 of article

III  of  the constitution are  hereby outlined  by  legal  subdivisions, as  follows:

No.  1.  Agency district. -Beginning  at a point on  the west bank  of  the Missouri Ri

ver, following the  township  line west to the  SE corner of  section 36,  township  14
north, range  29 east;  thence  south  to the  southeast  corner of  section 36,  township  13
north,  range  29  east;  thence west  to the  southwest corner  of said section  36;  thence
south along the  range line to where  it  intersects  the west bank of  the Missouri River;
thence north and east along the west bank  of  the Missouri River to  the point  of  begin-
ning.

No, 2.  Bridger  district,  -Beginning  at  a  point  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Cheyenne
River  where  the  range  line  dividing  ranges  19  east  and  range  20  east  intersects  said
Cheyenne  River;  thence  north  to  the  township  line  dividing  townships  8  and  9  north;
thence  west  along  said  township  line  to  the  west  boundary  line  of  the  Cheyenne  River
Reservation;  thence  south  along  said  line  to  the  Cheyenne  River;  thence east  along  the
north bank of  said Cheyenne  River  to  the  point  of  beginning.

No, 3.  Cherry Creek district.  -Beginning  at  a point  on  the north bank  of  the Chey

enne  River  where  the  range  line  between  ranges  22  east  and  23  east  intersect  said  ri-
ver;  thence  north  following  said  range  line  to  the  township  line  dividing  townships  10

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-13-

and  11  north;  thence west  to the  southeast corner  of  section 36,  township  11  north,
range 20 east;  thence south  to the  southeast  corner of  section 36,  township  9 north,
range  20 east;  thence west  to a point  to the  range line  dividing ranges  19  and  20
east;  thence  south along said range  line to  the  north bank  of  the Cheyenne River;
thence  along the  bank  of  the Cheyenne River  to the  point  of beginning.

No. 4.  Red Scaffold  district. -Beginning  at  the  southeast corner  of  section 36,
township  9 north, range  20 east;  thence north along the range  line to the southeast
corner  of  section 36,  township  12  north, range  20 east;  thence west along  the  town-
ship  line to the west boundary line  of  the  said Cheyenne River Reservation;  thence
south  along said  reservation boundary  line  to where  the  township  line  dividing town-
ships  8 north  and 9 north intersect  said boundary  line  of  the  reservation;  thence
east  along  said  township  line to the point  of beginning.

No.  5.  Eagle  Butte  district.  -Beginning  at  a  point  on  the  north  bank  of  the  Chey

enne  River  where  the  range line dividing range 26  east  and  range  27  east  intersect
said river;  thence north  to the right-of-way  to the Chicago, Milwaukee and Pacific
Railroad;  thence along said right-of-way across  section 36,  township 13  north, range
line  to the  southeast corner  of  section
26  east;  thence
the  township
west  to the  southeast corner of  section
36,  township  14
east;  thence
south to  the southeast  corner of  section
36,  township  14
east;  thence
west to the southeast  corner of  section
18,  township  12
east;  thence
south  to  the  southeast corner  of  section
13,  township  12
east;  thence
east  to the  southeast  corner of  section
36, 
township  11
east;  thence
south along the range line  to the north
east;  thence
36, 
township  11
the  said Cheyenne River  in a northeaster
bank  of  the  Cheyenne  River;  thence  following
ly  direction  to  the  point  of  beginning.

north  following
north, range  26
north, range  22
north, range  23
north, range  21
north,  range 21
north, range 22

No.  6.  Fourbear  district. -Beginning  on  the west bank  of  the Missouri River at a

point where  the  township line dividing townships 15  and 16  north  intersect  said  ri-
ver;  thence west  to the  southeast corner of  section 36,  township  16  north, range  29
east;  thence  south along the range line to the  southeast corner  of section  36,  town-
ship 14  north, range 29 east;  thence east along the  township line to where it  inter-
sects the west bank of  said Missouri River;  thence  north along the west bank  of  the
Missouri River  to the  point of  beginning.

No. 7,  Green  Grass district.  -Beginning  at  the southeast corner of  section  36,
township  14 north, range  26  east;  thence north to  the  southeast corner of  section 36,
township  15  north, range  26  east;  thence west  to the  southeast corner of  section 36,
township  15 north, range  24 east;  thence north to the southeast  corner  of  section 36,
township  16  north, range  24 east;  thence west  to the southeast  corner of  section  36,
township  16  north, range  23  east;  thence  north following the range  line to the north
boundary  line  of  the Cheyenne River Reservation;  thence west  to the northeast corner
of section  2, township  17  north, range  22 east;  thence  south  to the  south boundary
line  of  township  17  north;  thence  east  to where  the range line  dividing ranges  22 and
23  east  intersect said  township line;  thence south  along said  range  line  to the  south
east corner  of  section  36,  township  14  north, range 22 east;  thence east  along the
township line to the point  of beginning.

No. 8,  Lantrey district.  -Beginning
ship  12 north,  range  22 east;  thence  due
township  15 north, range  22 east;  thence
township  15 north,  range 21 east;  thence
corner  of  section  13,  township  12  north,
beginning.

at  the southeast corner  of  section  18,  town-
north to the  southeast  corner of  section 1,
west  to the southeast  corner  of  section 1,
south along the range  line  to the  southeast
range  21  east;  thence west  to the point  of

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-14-

No.  9.  LaPlant district.  -Beginning  at  a point  on the west bank  of  the Missouri

River where  the  range  line dividing ranges  29 and  30 east  intersects  said river;
thence north following said  range  line  to the  southeast corner  of  section 13,  town-
ship  15  north,  range 29 east;  thence west to the  southeast  corner of  section  18,town-
ship  15  north, range  28 east;  thence  south to  the  southeast  corner of  section 31,
township  15 north, range  28 east;  thence west to the  southeast  corner of section  36,
township  15 north, range  26  east;  thence  south following the  range  line  to the north
bank  of  the Cheyenne River;  thence meandering along  the banks  of  said Cheyenne River
and the Missouri  River to the  point of  beginning.

No.  10,  Promise district. -Beginning  at  the southeast corner of  section 13,  town-

ship  15  north,  range  29 east;  thence north to the north boundary  line  of  the  said
Cheyenne River  Reservation;  thence west along said  boundary  line  to the  northeast  cor
ner of  section  1, township  17  north, range  27  east;  thence  south  to the southeast cor
ner of  section  18,  township  15  north, range  28 east;  thence east  to the  point of be-
ginning.

No. 11.  Robertson precinct. -Beginning  at  a point where  the north boundary  line  of
the Cheyenne River Reservation intersects  the Missouri River;  thence west  to the  north
east corner  of  section 1, township  17 north,  range 29 east;  thence south  following the
range  line  to the  southeast corner  of  section 36,  township  16  north, range  29  east;
thence  east following said  township  line  to the west  bank of  the Missouri  River;thence
north along the west bank  of  the Missouri River to  the point of beginning.

No. 12,  Thunder Butte  district. -Beginning  at  the  southeast corner of  section 36,
township  11  north, range 21  east;  thence north following  the range line  to the south-
east  corner of  section  1, township 15  north, range  21  east;  thence east to  the south-
east  corner of  section 1, township  15  north, range  22  east;  thence north foll6wing
the section  line to the north boundary line  of  the Cheyenne River Reservation;  thence
west  following the said boundary  line  to the  northwest corner of  the  said Cheyenne Ri-
ver Reservation;  thence  south following the west boundary  line  of  said Cheyenne River
Reservation to the  south boundary line  of  township  12 north;  thence east to the south
east  corner of  section  36,  township  12 north,  range  20 east;  thence  south to thesouth
east  corner of  section  36, 
the  township line  to the point of beginning.

township  11  north,  range  20  east;  thence east following

No.  13. White Horse  district. -Beginning  at  the  southeast  corner of  section 31,
township 15  north,  range  28  east;  thence  due  north to the north boundary  line  of  the
Cheyenne River Reservation;  thence west to the  northeast corner of  section  1, town-
ship  17 north,  range 23  east;  thence  south along the  range  line to the  southeast cor-
ner  of  section  36,  township 16  north, range  23  east;  thence  east to the  southeast  cor
ner  of  section  36,township  16 north, range 24 east;  thence  south to  the  southeast  cor
ner  of section  36,  township 15  north, range  24 east;  thence  east to the  point  of  be-
ginning.
 
 

ARTICLE  IV  -

MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

 
 SECTION 1.  Immediately  after  the election  of members  of the  tribal  council and
said elected members  are  duly  certified as provided  for  in  article  III,  section 6,the
members  shall assemble  at  the Cheyenne Agency and  organize  for business,  and appoint
one  sergeant-at-arms.

SEC.  2.  The council  shall meet  regularly on  the  first Tuesday  of  each month.  The

meetings  shall be held at  the  agency office  or other  building provided for  such pur-
pose.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-15-

SEC,  3. Special  meetings  of  the  council  shall  be  held  at  such  times  as  are  desig-

nated by the  chairman, and  he  shall notify the  members  at  least  twenty-four (24)
hours  before the  date  of  such meeting.

SEC.  4.  At any  special  or regular meeting  of  the  tribal council with two-thirds
(2/3)  of  the members present  it  shall  constitute a quorum,  and the  council may  pro-
ceed  to transact  any  business  that may come before  it.  Without  a quorum  the chair-
man  shall  adjourn  the  meeting,

SEC.  5.  Special meetings  of  the  council  shall also be held upon written  request
of  either seven  (7) members of  the council  or by petition signed  by  one  hundred  (100)
legal voters  of  the  tribe.  Such written request shall  be  filed with the chairman  or
the  secretary  of  the  council,  and he  shall  notify the council members  twenty-four
(24) hours  before the  date of  such council  meeting.

SEC.  6,  All sessions  of  the  tribal council  (except executive)  shall be  open  to
all  members  of the  tribe,  Balloting at  all  sessions shall  be  either by  acclamation
or by  secret written ballot,  as  the presiding officer shall  direct.

SEC. 7.  The council may,  upon motion duly passed,  go into executive sessions. At

such sessions  all  persons  shall  be excluded from the council chamber,  and any  such
person whose presence  shall  be  required before  the  council  shall  be  designated by  the
chairman, and no  other persons  shall be  allowed to be present  other  than the members
of  the council  and the  secretary.

SEC. 8,  The  order  of business  at  any  regular  or  special meeting of  the  tribal

council  shall be as  follows:

(a) Council  called to  order for  session.
(b) Roll  call.
(c) Prayer by  an authorized person.
(d) Opening address  by  the presiding officer or  by  others.
(e) Reading and  acceptance of  minutes  of  previous meeting.
(f) Reports  of  standing committee,
(g) Reports  of  council treasurer.
(h) Reports  of  the  special  committees.
(i) Reports  of  the board  of  directors or  advisors.
(j) Reading of  communications and  reports.
(k) Impeachment  trials.
(1) Installation  of  new  officers,
(m)  Unfinished  business.
(n) New business.
(o) Appointment  ofcommittees  and directors.
(p) Adjournment.

SEC.  9,  It  shall  be  the  duty of  the  council to exercisecare  and caution  to the
end that a complete record  is  preserved of  all acts  of  the council  and  of all  commit-
tees appointed  therefrom.  Accurate copies  of all  such  records  shall  be preserved in
the  files  of  the council  and  accurate copies  of  all  necessary records  shall  be  trans-
mitted  to such  bureaus, departments,  or  elsewhere as  may be required.

SEC.  10.  All records  of  the  council  and  its  committees  or delegates  shall at  all
times  be  a matter of  public  record, and any member of  the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe
or his  authorized representative,  or  any properly authorized  officer or  employee  of
any  Government  department shall have  full access  to same during business hours. How-

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-16-

ever,  it  is  provided  that matters  before the council while  in  executive session  shall
be, at  the  option  of  the council, withheld from the public  or  from individuals  or  their
representatives,  until  after same  shall  have been acted upon  or  otherwise  quietly dis-
posed of.

SEC.  11,  Copies  of all  leases, contracts,  deeds,  or  assignments  and  all  other pa-
pers  or  documents  pertaining to  lands  of  any  nature  on the  reservation  shall  be  care-
fully  preserved by  the  council, and  insofar as  it  is  possible all  other documents  af-
fecting the  rights  and equities  of  the  tribe  as  a whole,  or  the  individual members
thereof,  shall be  kept  and preserved  in  order  that  such information  shall  at  all  times
be  available  to the  council and  to  the  individual  members  of  the  tribe;  and duplica-
tions  of  all  such documents shall  be deposited  in the files  of  one  agency.
 
 

ARTICLE  V  -

TRIBAL  COURT  (JUDICAL  CODE)

 
 SECTION 1.  (a) It  shall be  the  duty  of  the council  to provide,  through the  neces-
sary  by-laws  or  ordinances,  for the  establishment  of  a tribal  court  upon the  reserva-
tion.

(b) This court  shall  have the  jurisdiction  over all  such petty  offenses  not falling

within the  exclusive jurisdiction  of Federal  or  State  courts,  as may be provided  in
the  ordinances  of  the  tribe.

(c) This court  shall have  jurisdiction  over all  Indians upon  the reservation and
over  such disputes  or  lawsuits as  shall occur  between  Indians  on  the  reservation or
between Indians  and  non-Indians where  such cases  are brought  before  it  by  stipulation
of both parties  provided that  jurisdiction  over  Indian  employees  of  the  Indian  Service
shall  be  subject  to  rules  and regulations  prescribed by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior.

(d) The  duties  and  jurisdiction  of  this  court  shall be more  fully prescribed by ap-

propriate by-laws  or  ordinances.

SEC.  2.  It  shall  be the duty  of  the council to establish  by  ordinance  a tribal  po-

lice  force which shall  have full  jurisdiction upon  the reservation,  the authority  and
duties  of this police  force under which  it will  function may be  outlined by  the  coun-
cil,  such police  to be  employees  of the  council and shall  be  an agency  of  the  tribal
court,
 
 

ARTICLE  VI  -

RELATION  BETWEEN  FEDERAL AND TRIBAL GOVERNMENT

 
 SECTION  1. 

The  Indians  of  the Cheyenne River Reservation recognize their  inability
to control  or assume all  responsibilities  of administration,  such  as:  The  supervision
of health and educational  services;  employees  of  the Federal Government  through whom
we must make contact with the administrative  office  in Washington  to manage wholly our
internal affairs;  and matters  over which the  tribal council  has no authority,
 
 

ARTICLE VII -

LAW OF PROPERTY

 
 SECTION 1.  It  shall  be  the duty  of  the  council to pass  rules  and  regulations  to
prevent  unauthorized prospecting or mining of  any  kind upon  the reservation and  to  see
that  such rules  and  regulations are properly  enforced.

SEC.  2.  The council  shall  pass  ordinances  for the  control  of hunting and  fishing
upon  the reservation, not conflicting with any  of  the Federal or State  game laws.  The
council  shall enforce  such ordinances  and cooperate with Federal and State  authorities

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-17-

for protection of  game  on  the reservation.  Further, the council may  issue  licenses
for hunting  and  fishing and  shall  establish and act  for same.
 
 

ARTICLE  VIII  -

PUBLIC  WELFARE

 
 SECTION  1.  Charity.--(a) The council  at all  times determines  in careful manner
what constitutes just  cause for charity  or  financial  aid  or assistance to the  indi-
gent members  of  the  tribe, and shall  make proper provisions for  recommendation to
proper  agencies  for  relief.

(b) The  council  shall designate persons who shall  administer charity work on  the
reservation,  and the  solicitation and  expenditure of  charity  funds  conducted  in a sy
stematic manner  and that  the right  to do so may not  be abused.  It  shall  seek and co
operate with such charity  organizations  and thereby  render assistance or  aid to the
poor and needy.

(c) The  council  shall  at  all times  endeavor to discuss and  eliminate the  cause

for  indigency,  exercising wise  and judicious  supervision and management  of  the  ad-
fairs  of the  finances  of  individual  members  of  the  tribe,  to the end that  need, pri-
vation, and  financial distress may be  entirely eliminated among the members  of  the
tribe.

SEC.  2.  Education,-(a) The  council  shall pass necessary  ordinances  to promote
and  increase  learning and education among the members  of  the  tribe,  studying present
school  systems,  and  recommending plans  for  improving them to the proper bureaus  or
departments.

(b) The council  shall  enter into negotiations with nonreservation schools and pro
cure for the members  of  the tribe  the highest  type  of educational  facilities,  to the
end that younger members  of  the  tribe  shall  have every possible advantage, attaining
that degree of  education that  will  fit them to meet  and take  part  in  the modern civ-
ilization and advancement.

SEC.  3.  Social welfare.-(a) The  council shall encourage and promote among the
residents  of  the  reservation  by  every  pratical means a proper  system of social  and
home education  in home economics, hygiene, home demonstrations, agronomy and farm  de
monstrations, with the cooperation of  State, county, and Federal  departments,  and
agencies which  seek to promote such social welfare and  agricultural development  work.
 
 

ARTICLE  IX  -

LOANS

 
 The  tribal council  shall  act  upon  all  applications  for  loans  under  a  revolving
fund or  reimbursable regulations  for  the purchase  of  property,  stock, or equipment,
or  loans to  Indians,  for  the payment  of  tuition  for  higher education or  trade  schoo14,
out  of  the allotment to  the Cheyenne River Reservation as  provided  in  the act  of  June
18,  1934  (48 State.  984),  for  such purposes.
 
 

ARTICLE X -

APPLICATION FOR FUNDS

 
 The  tribal council  shall  act  in  an advisory capacity upon all applications  to  the

superintendent for  the withdrawal from  the  United States Treasury  of  trust  funds,
Sioux benefits,  or  the Cheyenne River Reservation 3% funds,  or  any other  tribal funds,
may adopt  rules and  regulaticas not  in conflict with  law,  subject to  the approval  of
the  superintendent  governing withdrawal  of  individual  Indian money.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY
 
 

ARTICIE XI  -

TRIBAL CLAIMS

 
 -18-

The  council  shall make a thorough survey, research,  investigation, and  study  of

the history  and  title  of  all  lands which  are now tribal  in  character  or  that have
been  tribal in character  in  times past  and shall  endeavor to reestablish the  tribal
equity,  if  any,  in such lands  so  as  to obtain  through proper channels  just compensa-
tion for  such  lands, which  it  shall  find to have been unlawfully  removed from the
present  Jurisdiction  of  the  tribe and without  just compensation.
 
 

ARTICLE  XII  -

GUARDIANSHIP

 
 The council  shall  pass  all necessary  ordinances  whereby  the rights  of minors and
incompetents  shall be properly  safeguarded,  and shall  see that the  administration  of
such funds  and  other assets  shall  be  for the  exclusive benefit  of  such minors  or  in-
It  shall  be  the  duty  of  the  council  to  make  semi-annual  reports  concern
competents. 
ing all  such guardianship  funds  or  assets,  and  that  such  reports  be  matters  of  public
record, with the  exception of  the  trust  funds  and  individual  Indian money, upon  the
approval  of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  which is  deposited and  supervised by  the
superintendent.
 
 

ARTICLE  XIII  -

NATIONAL  SIOUX  COUNCIL

 
 The  tribal  council  shall  have  the  further  power  to  select  delegates  to  sit  in  na-

tional  councils  of  the entire Sioux Nation,  Said national  council  of  the  Sioux  Na-
tion  shall  be formed by  the  meeting of  said delegates  whenever five  (5) of  the  follow
ing Sioux Tribes  shall  adopt a constitution containing a provision  similar to this:
Standing Rock, Cheyenne River, Lower Brule, Crow Creek, Pine Ridge,  Rosebud, Santee,
Fort Peck.
 
 

ARTICLE  XIV  -

ADOPTION

 
 This  constitution and  by-laws, when ratified by  a majority vote  of  the  qualified

voters  of  the  Sioux Tribe  of  the Cheyenne  River Reservation voting at  an election
called  for  the purpose by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior, provided  that at  least  30 per
cent  of  those  entitled to vote  shall  vote  in  such election, shall  be submitted  to the
Secretary  of  the  Interior,  and,  if  approved, shall  be effective  from the  date of  ap-
proval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE  OF  ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an  order, approved  October 29,  1935, by  the Secretary of  the  Interior,
the  attached constitution and by-laws were  submitted for  ratification to the Cheyenne
River Tribe  of Sioux  Indians  and were  on December 7, 1935,  duly  ratified  by a vote of
576  for,  and 366 against,  in an  election  in which over  30 percent  of  those entitled
to vote  cast  their ballots,  in accordance with section 16  of  the  Indian Reorganiza-
ticn Act  of  June  18,  1934 (48  Stat.  984) as  amended by  the act  of  June  15,  1935  (Pub-
lic,  No. 147,  74th Cong.).

HARRY F. C. WOODS,
Chairman of  Election Board.
 
 

LUKE GILBERT,

 
 Chairman of  Cheyenne River Sioux

T-ibal Council

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

-19-

JAMES  E.  HIWAWK,

Tribal  Secretary.

WALTER  F.  DICKENS,

Superintendent.

I, Harold L. Ickes,  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior of  the United States  of Ameri-
ca, by  virtue  of  the authority  granted me by  the  act  of  June  18,  1934 (48  Stat, 984),
as  amended, do hereby  approve the  attached constitution  and by-laws  of  the Cheyenne
River Tribe  of  Sioux Indians.

All rules  and  regulations heretofore promulgated by the  Interior  Department or  by
the Office  of  Indian Affairs,  so  far  as  they may be  incompatible with any  of  the pro-
visions  of  the  said constitution or  by-laws are hereby declared inapplicable  to the
Cheyenne River Tribe  of Sioux  Indians.

All  officers  and employees  of  the  Interior  Department are  ordered to abide  by the

provisions  of  the  said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended  December 23,  1935.
 
  
  
 

JOHN COLLIER,

 
 Commissioner of  Indian Affairs.

HAROLD  L.  
 

ICKES,

 
 Secretary  of  the  Interior.
(Seal]

Washington, D. C.,  December 27,  1935.

The Cheyenner River  Sioux Tribe has  never adopted a Charter.

Reproduction  by  Permission of Buffalo  & Erie  County  Public  Library Buffalo,  NY

