Constitution of the Cheyenne 
River Sioux Indians 
(Minneconjou, Itazapcosni, 
Sihasapa, and Oehe 
Numpa Peoples, 1923)

The Native peoples of the Cheyenne River Reservation are Lakota 
speakers and part of the Great Sioux Nation. Their reservation is 
located in north central South Dakota. One of the largest remaining 
reservations, it consists of approximately 1.5 million acres of land 
held in trust by the United States. The Cheyenne River peoples were 
signatories to the 1851 Treaty of Fort Laramie, which formally estab
lished the boundaries of the Great Sioux Nation, with the 1868 Fort 
Laramie Treaty further cementing the land rights of the Lakota and 
other tribal nations. The actual Cheyenne River Reservation was not 
officially demarcated until 1889, after the discovery of gold, Custer’s 
defeat, and white settler interest in the area led the federal government 
to violate the previous treaties and force significant land reductions 
on the Lakota peoples via congressional agreements and the allotment 
process. Two congressional acts in particular were devastating to the 
tribe’s land base: The so-called Surplus Lands Acts of 1908 and 1910 
empowered the secretary of interior to make nearly 60 percent of the 
reservation available to non-Indians for homesteading purposes.

By the 1920s the Cheyenne River Sioux were in a state of dis
repair with regard to their lands, health, housing, and other matters. 
Nevertheless, taking the initiative in 1923, the tribe’s leadership drafted 
a constitution in an effort to assert a measure of political coherence 
for their nation. The Office of Indian Affairs received the charter on 
March 10, 1923, although the limited documentation available does 
not indicate that federal officials ever approved it. A slightly revised 
constitution was later written and submitted to the BIA in 1925 and 
was approved on May 25 of that year. This document remained in 
effect until the tribe formally adopted an Indian Reorganization Act 
(IRA) constitution in the fall of 1935.

Glover, John Henry. Tribal Sovereigns of South Dakota: A Description of 
Contemporary Sioux Governments (Rapid City, S.D.: Chiesman Foundation 
for Democracy, 2005).

National Archives. RG 75, Central Classified Files, 1907-1939, 

Cheyenne River, File 94590-1922-054.

Cheyenne River Sioux Constitution

We, the committee appointed to draft the Constitution and by-laws for the 
General Council of the Cheyenne River Sioux Indians, have the honor to sub
mit the following, which we respectfully recommend be adopted.

Constitution and By-Laws of the General Council 
of the Cheyenne River Sioux Indians

Article I

This organization shall be known as the General Council of the Cheyenne 
River Sioux Indians.

Article II

The officers of the Council shall consist of a Chairman, Assistant Chairman, 
Secretary and Treasurer.

Article III

A person to be eligible to election to any of the positions provided for in Article 
2 hereof must be an allotted male member of the Cheyenne River Sioux Indians 
and must not be less than 30, nor more than 55 years of age, except in the case 
of the Secretary, to which position an allotted male member of the Cheyenne 
River Sioux Indians not less than 21 years of age shall be eligible.

Article IV

The officers provided for herein shall be elected by a majority vote of the Secretary 
council and the term of office in each case shall be one year, all officers to be 
elected at a General council which will be called for that purpose annually.

Article V

It shall be the duty of the Chairman to preside at all meetings and deliberations 
of the General Council. He can not vote upon any question of motion made by 
the Council except in case of a tie.

Article VI

The assistant Chairman shall perform the duties of the Chairman when the 
Chairman is absent from duty.

Article VII

Should both Chairman and Assistant Chairman be absent, a Temporary 
Chairman shall be elected by the council to serve only during that session of

the council. His duties and powers shall be the same as those of the regularly 
elected Chairman or Assistant Chairman.

Article VIII

It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep accurate minutes of all meetings 
of the General Council and to answer and file all correspondence that may 
be received by him in connection with the deliberations of previous General 
Councils or matters to be taken up by subsequent councils.

Article IX

Should the regularly elected secretary be absent, a temporary secretary shall 
be elected by the General Council and it shall be the duty of the temporary 
secretary to keep accurate minutes of the meeting for which he was elected and 
immediately transmit the minutes to the regular secretary.

Article X

The Treasurer shall have charge of and account for all monies belonging to the 
General Council and shall make no disbursements therefrom except when the 
Council votes that the money be disbursed and the Treasurer receives an order 
for such disbursement signed by the Chairman and Secretary. He shall render 
a statement of all monies received, disbursed and on hand at the time of the 
regular election of officers provided for in Article IV hereof.

Article XI

Any or all officers of this Council shall be removed from his office if con
victed for the violation of any State or Federal Law or for any violation of any 
regulation of the Indian Office, or taking charge of any matters or correspon
dence affecting the tribe without the full knowledge and consent of the General 
Council, or if he should absent himself from two successive councils without 
good and sufficient reason, the Council to be the judge of the reasons offered.

Article XII

Whenever the tribe congregates and a Tribal Council is called, all the male 
adults over the age of 18 shall have a voice and vote in the council, otherwise 
the General Council shall consist of forty delegates, ten to be elected by each 
of the four district Councils. For the purpose of transacting the business of the 
General Council, a quorum is present, the Council shall [missing words] pro
ceed with the transaction of business, and in case of the failure of one or more 
of the regularly elected delegates to attend the General Council appointment to 
fill the vacancies resulting from such failure to attend shall not be made either 
by the Chairman or otherwise. [missing words]

Article XIII

All matters pertaining to and affecting the tribe as a whole shall be acted upon 
by the General Council.

Article XIV

Delegates shall be elected by the District Councils whenever action [sic] is 
received that a General Council has been called. As soon as the delegates have 
been elected by the District Councils the names of the delegates as elected 
shall immediately be certified to the Superintendent by the Chairman and 
Secretary of the District Councils, all the names so certified to constitute the 
roll of the General Council. This roll shall be called immediately upon the 
convening of a General Council and when a vote is taken upon any motion or 
question before the Council. In the latter case, the Secretary shall record the 
yea and nay votes by writing in the minutes the names of the delegates and 
the way they voted.

Article XV

A General Council shall be called by the Superintendent whenever ordered by 
the Indian Office, or in his judgment, he has received sufficient matter requir
ing the action of the General Council to justify him in calling a meeting of the 
same, or whenever the Indians of the reservation, through the Chairman of the 
General Council, have brought such matters to his attention. It shall be the duty 
of the Superintendent to notify each District of the call for a General Council 
30 days in advance of the date set for the meeting of the General Council (or 
in case of emergency where great loss would result to the tribe if the 30-day 
notice is strictly adhered to, at least 10 days in advance of the date set for the 
meeting), the date for the meeting of the General Council to be determined by 
the Superintendent and the Chairman of the Council. When sending out the call 
for the meeting of the General Council, the Superintendent shall state in the 
call, the objects or points to be taken up by the Council and when the Council 
is convened the business to be transacted by the council is to be confined to 
that specified in the call; provided, that the Council shall take up important 
matters that may arise during the time between the call for the Council and the 
convening of the same.

Article XVI

When a member of the Council is recognized by the Chairman and takes the 
floor, he shall confine his remarks to the subject then under discussion and the 
length of time he shall be permitted to speak on that subject is not limited; 
provided, that no member shall be permitted to speak more than once on any 
subject without first securing permission therefor from the Chairman.

Article XVII

Within ten days after the adjournment of the General Council, the Secretary 
shall transmit the minutes to the Superintendent, the minutes transmitted to be 
signed by the Chairman and attested by the Secretary.

Article XVIII

All actions of the General Council shall be submitted to the Business Council. 
For the purpose of acting upon the minutes of the General Council, a meeting 
of the Business Council, the Superintendent and the Secretary of the General 
Council shall be held at the Agency Office on the tenth day after the adjourn
ment of the General Council. All actions of the General Council that meet 
with the approval of the Business Council provided for in this article [sic]. 
Any action of the General Council that may be disapproved by the Business 
Council shall be referred back to the General Council for its reconsideration at 
its next meeting.

Walter Swift Bird, 
Jas. Crow Feather, 
John Promise, 
Henry W. Fielder, 
Straight Head (his X mark).

