 
 UNITED STATES 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
OF THE CHEYENNE RIVER 
SIOUX TRIBE

SOUTH DAKOTA


 
  
 APPROVED DECEMBER 27, 1935 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1936

LIBRARY of congress 

APR 13 1936 

DIVISION Of DOCUMENTS
 
 

 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE CHEYENNE 
RIVER SIOUX TRIBE OF SOUTH DAKOTA

PREAMBLE

 
  We, the Sioux Indians of the Cheyenne River Reservation in the 
 State of South Dakota in order to establish our tribal organization, 
to conserve our tribal property, to develop our common resources, 
to establish justice, and to promote the welfare of ourselves and our 
descendants, do hereby ordain and establish this constitution and 
by-laws for our tribal council as a guide to its deliberations.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Cheyenne River Reservation Sioux Tribe 
of Indians shall extend to the territory within the original confines 
of the diminished reservation boundaries, which are described by the 
act of March 2, 1889 (25 Stat. L. 888), and including trust allot
ments without the herein mentioned boundaries and such other lands 
as may be hereafter added thereto under any law of the United 
States, except as otherwise provided for by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe 

shall consist of the following:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the offi

cial census roll of the tribe as of June 18, 1934.

(b)  All children born to any member of the Cheyenne River Sioux 
Tribe who is a resident of the reservation at the time of the birth 
of said children.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall have the power:
(a)  To admit persons of Cheyenne River Sioux Indian blood to 

membership upon a two-thirds (%) vote of the tribal council.

(b)  To strike from the census rolls of the Cheyenne River Sioux 
Tribe any person who makes application to sever his tribal relations 
and thereafter such person shall cease to be a member of the 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of Indians.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Cheyenne River Sioux 
Tribe shall consist of a council, known as the Cheyenne River Sioux 
Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. The governing body under this constitution and by-laws 
shall be composed of one (1) tribal chairman, one (1) tribal secre
tary, and one (1) tribal treasurer; also fifteen (15) councilmen and 
such offices as from time to time may be created by the tribal council.
Sec. 3. The tribal chairman, the tribal secretary, and the tribal 
treasurer shall be elected at large by popular vote; councimen shall 

(1)

2

be elected from each district or political subdivision of the reserva
tion by the legal voters residing within the district or precinct from 
which such councilman is to be elected. There shall be thirteen (13) 
districts or voting precincts as hereinafter described in article III, 
section 4 of the by-laws. Councilmen shall be apportioned by and 
from each district or voting precinct of the reservation as follows:

1.  Agency precinct, which shall include the Agency Swiftbird 1, 

and Shepard Bottom communities: One (1) delegate.

2.  Bridger precinct, which shall include the Bridger community: 

One (1) delegate.

community: One (1) delegate.

community: Two (2) delegates.

munity: One (1) delegate.

munity: One (1) delegate.

3.  Cherry Creek precinct, which shall include the Cherry Creek 

4.  Red Scaffold precinct, which shall include the Red Scaffold 

5.  Eagle Butte precinct, which shall include the Eagle Butte com

6.  Four Bear precinct, which shall include the Four Bear com

7.  Green Grass precinct, which shall include the Bear Creek, Green 

Grass, and Sans Arc communities: One (1) delegate.

8.  Lantry precinct, which shall include the Upper Bear Creek 

community: One (1) delegate.

9.  La Plant precinct, which shall include the La Plant and Ridge

view communities: Two (2) delegates.

10.  Promise precinct, which shall include the Promise community: 

One (1) delegate.

11.  Robertson precinct, which shall include the Black Feet and 

Swift Bird II communities: One (1) delegate.

12.  Thunder Butte precinct, which shall include the Iron Light

ning and East Thunder Butte communities: One (1) delegate.

13.  White Horse precinct, which shall include the White Horse 

and the Black Tongue communities: One (1) delegate.

Provided: That the Cheyenne River Tribal Council shall have the 
power both to redistrict the reservation and its precincts and to re
assign the number of councilmen to be elected from each district in 
proportion to the number of qualified voters residing therein, or on 
a population basis.

Sec. 4. The officers and councilmen provided for in section 2 of 
this article shall be elected for the following term of office; general 
elections will be held every two years on the first Tuesday after the 
first Monday in the month of September.

(a)  The tribal chairman, tribal secretary, and the tribal treasurer 
first elected shall each serve until October 1, 1938; thereafter the 
term of office for these officials shall be four years.

(b)  The councilmen elected at the first general election in no. 1, 
agency district or precinct; no. 2, Bridger district or precinct; one 
councilman from no. 4, Red Scaffold district or precinct; no. 7, Green 
Grass district or precinct; one councilman from no. 9, La Plant dis
trict or precinct; no. 11, Robertson district or precinct; and no. 13, 
White Horse district or precinct shall be elected and hold office until 
October 1, 1938, when there shall be a general election for council
men in these districts; thereafter councimen shall hold office for a 
term of four (4) years.

3

(c)  All other councilmen elected at the first general election from 
the no. 3, Cherry Creek district or precinct; one councilman from no. 
4. Red Scaffold district or precinct; no. 5, Eagle Butte district or 
precinct; no. 6, Four Bear district or precinct; no. 8, Lantry district 
or precinct; one councilman from no. 9, La Plant district or precinct; 
no. 10, Promise district or precinct; and no. 12, Thunder Butte dis
trict or precinct shall hold office until October 1, 1940; thereafter 
councilmen shall hold office for a term of four (4) years.

Sec. 5. The first election of the tribal council members shall be 
held on call of the provisional committee which shall consist of 
twenty-six (26) members of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of In
dians, two (2) from each of the voting precincts on said reservation 
on October 27, 1934, and five Indian Service employees, which com
mittee the superintendent of said reservation may appoint to super
vise the election of officers and councilmen, within thirty (30) days 
after this constitution and by-laws has been approved by the Secre
tary of the Interior.

Sec. 6. This committee shall issue its certificate of election to the 
persons receiving the highest number of votes in each district in 
accordance with the quota assigned hereby to each of said districts 
provided for in article III, section 3.

The officers and councilmen so elected and certified to shall report 
at the Cheyenne River Agency within ten days after the election and 
take the oath of office. The reservation superintendent shall admin
ister the oath of office.

Said officers and councilmen shall convene within thirty (30) days 
after the election and organize for business and elect one assistant 
chairman from their own membership.

Sec. 7. The tribal council shall have supervision and authority 
over all subsequent elections as provided through bylaws or resolu
tions hereafter enacted.

Article IV—Powers of Self-Government

Section 1. The tribal council of the Cheyenne River Reservation 
shall exercise the following powers vested in the present council 
under existing laws or conferred by the act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984) and acts amendatory thereof or supplemental thereto, 
subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitu
tion of the United States, and subject further to all express restric
tions upon such powers contained in this constitution and the at
tached by-laws.

(a)  To enter into negotiations with the Federal, State, and local 

Governments on behalf of the tribe.

(b)  To present and prosecute any claims or demands of the Chey
enne River Sioux Tribe of Indians. It shall have the right to assist 
members of the tribe in presenting their claims and grievances before 
any court or agency of government. It shall have the right to em
ploy attorneys of record or representatives for such services, the 
choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets which may be 
authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the Commis

4

sioner of Indian Affairs, or any other official or agency of govern
ment, provided that no tribal lands shall ever be sold, encumbered 
or leased for a period exceeding five years.

(d)  To confer with the Secretary of the Interior upon all appro
priation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the tribe 
prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of Budget 
and Congress.

(e)  To receive voluntary relinquishments of allotments and heir
ship lands and to make assignments of tribal land to members of the 
Cheyenne River Sioux Reservation in conformity with article VIII 
of this constitution.

(f)  To select subordinate boards, officials, and employees not 
otherwise provided for in this constitution and to prescribe their 
tenure and duties and to establish district councils; to authorize and 
establish any association or organization having for its purpose and 
sole object the benefit of the members of the Cheyenne River Sioux 
Tribe. Such association or organization shall have the right to en
gage in collective or cooperative bargaining or marketing, or pur
chasing of supplies, crops, equipment, seed, machinery, building or 
livestock, the council reserving the right to establish ordinances 
covering the activities of such association or organization, and to 
enforce the observance of such ordinances.

(g)  To administer any funds or property within the control of the 
tribe; to make expenditures from available funds for public pur
poses, including salaries or other remuneration of tribal officials or 
employees. Such salaries or remuneration shall be paid only for 
services actually authorized in a regular and legal manner and 
actually rendered. All expenditures from the tribal council fund 
shall be by resolution duly passed by the council to that effect and 
the amount so paid shall be a matter of public record at all times.

(h)  The council shall have the power when just cause or extreme 
emergency exists, which shall create a hazard to the peace and safety 
of the tribe as a whole or to the individual members thereof, to re
quire the individual members of the tribe or other residents upon 
the reservation to assist with community labor.

(i)  To create and maintain a tribal council fund by accepting 
grants or donations from any person, State, or the United States, or 
by levying assessments of not less than ten cents, and not to exceed 
one dollar ($1.00) per year, per capita on the qualified voters of the 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, and to require the performance of 
community labor in lieu thereof, provided the payment of such per 
capita levy shall be made before any person shall vote in any elec
tion held more than six months after the date of said levy; and to 
levy taxes and license fees subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior, upon non-members doing business with the reservation. 
Any monev so collected shall be disposed of as provided for in article 
IV, section 1 (g) of this constitution.

(j)  To provide by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, for removal or exclusion from the territory of the 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe of any non-members whose presence 
may be injurious to the members of the tribe morally or criminally.
(k)  To promulgate ordinances for the purpose of safe-guarding 
the peace and safety of residents of the Cheyenne River Reservation, 

5

and to establish courts for the adjudication of claims or disputes 
arising among the members of the tribe and for the trial and punish
ment of members of the tribe charged with the commission of offenses 
set forth in such ordinances.

(1)  To purchase under condemnation proceedings, land or other 
property needed for public purposes, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(m)  To protect the public health and morals and to promote the 
public welfare by regulating the use and disposition of property 
of members of the tribe.

(n)  To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal, 
other than allotted lands, within the territory of the Cheyenne River 
Sioux Reservation, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.
(o)  To provide by ordinance for the appointment of guardians 
for minors and mental incompetents, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(p)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the council 
itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials of the reserva
tion.

Sec. 2. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which, by 
the terms of this constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior, shall be presented to the superintendent of the reserva
tion, who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or disap
prove the same. If the superintendent shall approve any ordinance 
or resolution, it shall thereupon become effective, but the superintend
ent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the 
Secretary of the Interior, who may within ninety (90) days from the 
date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any 
cause, by notifying the tribal council of such rescission.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or ordi
nance submitted to him, within ten days after its enactment, he shall 
advise the tribal council of his reasons therefor. If these reasons 
appear to the tribal council insufficient, it may, by a majority popu
lar vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the In
terior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of its enact
ment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or 
resolution shall become effective.

Sec. 3. Future powers.—The council shall have the power to act 
on such other necessary or emergency cases as may be delegated to the 
tribe by the Secretary of the Interior, or by any other official or 
agency of the Government.

Sec. 4. Reserved powers.—The foregoing enumeration of powers 
shall not be construed to limit the powers of the tribal council, but 
all powers of local government not expressly entrusted to the council 
by this constitution and by-laws shall be reserved to the legal voters 
of the Cheyenne River Tribe. Such powers may be exercised through 
appropriate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Article V—Elections and Nominations

Section 1. All enrolled members of the Cheyenne River Tribe, 21 
years of age or over, who have maintained legal residence on the 
reservation for a period of one year immediately prior to any election 
shall have the right to vote.

6

Sec. 2. No person shall be a candidate for membership in the tribal 
or district council or other tribal office unless he shall be a member of 
the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, and shall have resided for a period 
of one year next preceding the election in the district of his candidacy, 
and he shall be over twenty-five (25) years of age.

Sec. 3. Any member of the tribe may become a candidate for any 
office upon the signed petition of at least ten (10) legal voters from 
the district where he is declared to be a legal resident.

Any legal member of the tribe shall be considered a candidate for 
office when certified by the district council or other authorized organi
zation of the district presenting his candidacy.

Sec. 4. When any election is to be held on any or at all the districts, 
the chairman of the tribal council shall appoint a superintendent 
of an election in each of said districts, and the superintendent so ap
pointed shall have power to appoint two (2) judges and two (2) 
ballot clerks, which will constitute the election board. The duties of 
this election board shall be to supervise the election.

Article VI—Removal from Office

Section 1. If any officer or member of the tribal council shall ab
sent himself from any three (3) consecutive regular or special meet
ings without sufficient reason, the other members may declare the 
office vacant by two-thirds (⅔) vote of the council.

Sec. 2. Any officer or member of the tribal council convicted by 
Federal, State, or Indian court may be removed from office by two- 
thirds (⅔) vote of the council.

Sec. 3. If any vacancies occur in the membership of the tribal coun
cil through resignation, recall, impeachment, or death, the district 
council wherein he resides and is elected from shall proceed to elect 
a new councilman to finish the unexpired term of such member.

Sec. 4. Recall.—Every person elected to a tribal office by the Sioux 
Indians of the Cheyenne River Indian Reservation is subject to recall 
from such office upon petition of 40% of the electors of the reserva
tion, or the district or voting precinct, qualified to vote for such office, 
but no recall election shall be held without the approval of the 
council. 

Sec. 5. The ballot used at such election shall contain the question: 

“Shall----------------- be recalled from office on the Cheyenne River
Tribal Council?” and shall contain a space opposite such question, in 
which shall appear the words “Yes—No”, and the voter shall indicate 
by making a mark as to whether he wishes to vote for or against the 
recall of the member so named.

Sec. 6. No member of the council shall take part in the delibera
tions of the council, nor shall he have a vote in balloting upon any 
matter pertaining to any recall election or the results thereof when 
such member shall be the one whom it is proposed to recall.

Article VII—Referendum

Section 1. Upon a petition of at least three hundred (300) qualified 
voters of the Cheyenne River Sioux Reservation a referendum may be 
demanded on any enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution of the 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribal Council, and the vote of the majority

7

of the qualified voters in such referendum shall be conclusive and 
binding on the tribal council.

Article VIII—Land

Section 1. Allotted lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands, within the Cheyenne River Reservation shall continue to be 
held as heretofore by their present owners. It is recognized that 
under existing law such lands may be condemned for public purposes, 
such as roads, public buildings, or other public improvements, upon 
payment of adequate compensation, by any agency of the State of 
South Dakota or of the Federal Government, or by the tribe itself. 
It is further recognized that under existing law such lands may be 
inherited by the heirs of the present owner, whether or not they are 
members of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe. Likewise it is recog
nized that under existing law the Secretary of the Interior may, in 
his discretion, remove restrictions upon such land, upon application 
by the Indian owner, whereupon the land will become subject to 
State taxes and may then be mortgaged or sold.

The right of the individual Indian to hold or to part with his 
land, as under existing law, shall not be abrogated by anything con
tained in this constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, 
with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily con
vey his land to the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe either in exchange 
for a money payment or in exchange for an assignment covering the 
same land or other land, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 2. Tribal lands.—The unallotted lands of the Cheyenne River 
Reservation and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe or by the United States in trust for the 
Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe shall be held as tribal lands, and no 
part of such land shall be mortgaged or sold. Tribal lands shall not 
be allotted to individual Indians but may be assigned to members 
of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, or leased, or otherwise used by 
the tribe, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 3. Leasing of tribal lands.—Tribal lands may be leased by 
the tribal council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Inte
rior, for such periods of time as are permitted by law.

In the leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given, first to 
Indian cooperative associations, and, secondly, to individual Indians 
who are members of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe. No lease of 
tribal land to a non-member shall be made by the tribal council unless 
it shall appear that no Indian cooperative association or individual 
member of the tribe is able and willing to use the land and to pay a 
reasonable fee for such use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the tribal 
council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, in the 
same manner and upon the same terms as leases.

Sec. 4. Grant of “standard” assignments.—In any assignment of 
tribal lands which are now owned by the tribe or which hereafter 
may be acquired for the tribe by the United States or purchased by 
the tribe out of tribal funds, preference shall be given, first to heads 
of families which are entirely landless, and, secondly, to heads of 
families which have no allotted lands or interests in allotted lands 
but shall have already received assignments consisting of less than 

44589—36-------2
 
 

 
 
 8

an economic unit of agricultural land, or other land or interests in 
land of equal value, such unit to be determined from time to time by 
the tribal council.

The tribal council may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of not to exceed 

$25 on approval of an assignment made under this section.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary pur
pose of establishing homes for landless Indians, and shall be known 
as “standard” assignments.

Sec. 5. Tenure of “standard” assignments.—If any member of the 
tribe holding a “standard” assignment of land shall, for a period of 
two (2) years, fail to use the land so assigned, his assignment may 
be cancelled by the tribal council after due notice and an opportunity 
to be heard, and the said land, may be reassigned in accordance with 
the provisions of section 4 of this article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a “standard” assignment, 
his heirs or other individuals designated by him, by will or by 
written request shall have a preference in the reassignment of the 
land, provided such persons are members of the Cheyenne River 
Sioux Tribe who would be eligible to receive a “standard” assign
ment.

Sec. 6. Grant of “exchange” assignment.—Any member of the 
tribe who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land may 
voluntarily transfer his interest in such land to the tribe in exchange 
for any assignment to the same land or other land of equal value. 
If the assignee prefers, he may receive, in lieu of a specific tract 
of land, a proportionate share in a larger grazing unit.

Assignments made under this section shall be known as “exchange” 

assignments.

Sec. 7. Leasing of “exchange” assignments.—“Exchange” assign
ments may be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian co
operative associations, to individual members of the tribe, or, if no 
individual Indian or Indian cooperative association is able and will
ing to rent the land at a reasonable fee, such assignments may be 
leased to non-Indians, in the same manner as allotted lands.

Sec. 8. Inheritance of “exchange” assignments.—Upon the death 
of the holder of any “exchange” assignment, such land shall be re
assigned by the tribal council to his heirs or devisees, subject to the 
following conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or devisees 
who are not members of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe, except 
that a life assignment may be made to the surviving widower or 
widow of the holder of assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or devisees 
who already hold more than a certain number of acres of grazing 
land, or other land or interests in land of equal value, either under 
allotment or under assignment, such amounts to be determined from 
time to time by the council.

(c)  Such lands may not be subdivided among heirs or devisees 
into units too small for convenient management. No area of graz
ing land shall be subdivided into units smaller than sixty (60) 
acres, and no area of agricultural land shall be subdivided into 
units smaller than two and one-half acres, except that land used 
for buildings or other improvements may be divided to suit the 

9

conveniences of the parties. Where it is impossible to divide the 
land properly among the eligible heirs or devisees, the tribal coun
cil shall issue to such heirs or devisees grazing permits or other 
interests in tribal lands of the same value as the assignments of the 
decedent.

(d)  If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the pro
visions of section 4 of this article.

Sec. 9. Inheritance of improvements.—Improvements of any char
acter made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and inherited 
by members of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe or otherwise dis- 
posed of under such regulations as the tribal council shall provide.
No permanent improvements shall be removed from the land with

out the consent of the tribal council.

Sec. 10. Exchange of assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe by 
common consent in such manner as the tribal council shall desig
nate.

Sec. 11. Use of unassigned tribal land.—Tribal land which is not 
assigned, including tribal timber reserves, shall be managed by the 
tribal council for the benefit of the members of the entire tribe, and 
any cash income derived from such land shall accrue to the benefit 
of the tribe as a whole.

Sec. 12. Purchase of land by the tribe.—Tribal funds may be used 
with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire land, 
under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within the Cheyenne River Reservation or adjacent to 
the boundaries thereof which is not now in Indian ownership may 
be purchased by or for the Cheyenne River Tribe.

(b)  Restricted land, which is in heirship status at the time of the 
adoption and approval of this constitution, may be purchased by 
or for the tribe, with the consent of all the adult heirs, and the 
legal guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as 
may be agreed upon.

(c)  Land owned by any member of the tribe who is over the age 
of sixty (60) years, or who is physically incapacitated, may be trans
ferred by its owner to the tribe in exchange for a pension of not 
more than twice the usual rental value of the land for the life of 
the pensioner, to be paid out of available tribal funds.

(d)  Land in excess of 320 acres owned by any member of the 
tribe may be purchased by the tribe, with the consent of the owner, 
payments to be made under such terms as may be agreed upon.

(e)  Land owned by any member of the tribe who desires to leave 
the reservation permanently may be purchased by the tribe, under 
such terms as may be agreed upon.

Sec. 13. Method of making assignments.—Applications for assign
ment shall be filed with the secretary of the council and shall be in 
writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons applying for 
the land and as accurate a description of the land desired as the 
circumstances will permit. Notices of all applications received by 
the secretary shall be posted by him in the agency office and in at 
least three conspicuous places in the district in which the land is 
located for not less than twenty (20) days before action is taken 

10

by the council. Any member of the tribe wishing to oppose the 
granting of an assignment shall do so in writing, setting forth his 
objections, to be filed with the secretary of the council, and may if 
he so desires appear before the council to present evidence. The 
secretary of the council shall furnish the superintendent or other 
officers in charge of the agency, a complete record of all action taken 
by the council on applications for assignment of land, and a com
plete record of assignments shall be kept in the agency office and 
shall be open for inspection by members of the tribe.

The council shall draw up one or more forms for standard and 
exchange assignments, which shall be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

Article IX—Amendments

Section 1. This constitution and the appended by-laws may be 
amended by a majority of the qualified voters of the tribe voting at 
an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least 30 per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote 
m such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it 
shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior, upon 
presentation of a petition signed by at least two hundred (200) legal 
voters of the tribe, and upon request by the council, to call an elec
tion on any proposed amendment.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE CHEYENNE RIVER SIOUX TRIBE OF SOUTH 
DAKOTA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside at all 
meetings of the council. He shall have a vote only when a tie 
occurs.

Sec. 2. In the absence of the regular chairman the assistant chair
man shall preside and he shall have all powers, privileges, and duties 
of the regular chairman, and may cast a vote in the case of a tie.

Sec. 3. It shall be the duty of the tribal secretary to keep a 
true and accurate record of all matters affecting the tribal records 
and accounts, and to render a proper accounting of such records and 
statistics as are required by the tribal council. He shall be present 
at all meetings of the council and shall keep an accurate record of 
all council proceedings, including the minutes of each special and 
regular meeting.

(a)  Minutes of all special or regular meetings shall be in tripli
cate. the original copy to be filed at the Cheyenne Agency Tribal 
Office, one copy to be presented to the superintendent, and one copy 
to be transmitted to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

(b)  The secretary shall have voice in the deliberations of the 

council, but shall not vote.

Sec. 4. The duties of the treasurer of the tribal council shall be 
as follows: He shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve, and safe
guard all funds in the custody of the council, whether same be tribal 
funds or special funds for which the council is acting as trustee or 
custodian. He shall deposit all such funds in such bank or elsewhere, 

11

as directed by the council, and he shall keep an accurate record, 
filing same in the tribal council’s office, and he shall report all 
receipts and expenditures and accounts and the nature of all funds 
in his possession or custody, once every six months to the tribal 
council in writing, or at any time he is requested to do so by the 
tribal council.

(a)  He shall not disburse any funds in his custody belonging to 
the council except when authorized by a motion duly passed and 
properly recorded by the council.

(b)  He shall be present at all special or regular meetings of the 
council, but will have no voice or vote in the deliberations of the 
council, only when making reports or to furnish the necessary in
formation required by the council.

(c)  The treasurer shall be required to furnish a bond satisfactory 

to the council.

(d)  The books and records of the treasurer shall be audited at 
least once each year by a competent auditor employed by the tribal 
council or under the direction of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

Sec. 5. There shall be a sergeant-at-arms and he will be appointed 

by the tribal council.

(a)  It shall be his duty to be present at all meetings of the tribal 
council, and to maintain order and decorum within the council 
chamber; he shall serve all summonses emanating from the council, 
and shall perform such other duties as may be designated by the 
council. He shall have no voice or vote in the deliberations of the 
council, except when making reports or furnishing information re
quested by the council.

Article II—Qualifications of Office

Any person elected as an officer or councilman must be a Sioux 
Indian, enrolled on the Cheyenne River Reservation, and over 
twenty-five (25) years of age at the time of his or her election.

(a)  No employee of the Indian Service shall be elected as an 

(b)  No person convicted of felony shall be elected as an officer or 

(c)  The tribal council shall be the sole judge of the qualifications 

(d)  All councilmen must be elected from their respective districts, 

and be a resident of the district of which they are elected.

...

Article III—District or Precinct Organization, Elections, and 
Certification

Section 1. Each voting precinct established under this constitu
tion as provided in article III, section 4, shall elect at the first gen
eral election and biannually thereafter a president, secretary, and 
treasurer. These district officials shall hold office for a term of 
two years. The president shall call and preside oyer all councils of 
the community whenever necessary for the consideration of mat
ters of local interest and may exercise such further powers as may 
be delegated to him by the tribal council. He shall file with the

officer or councilman.

councilman.

of its own members. 

12

tribal council and certify all nominations for office within the pre
cinct and at large, according to section 3, article V of this consti
tution. The actions of the precinct officers shall not be inconsistent 
with the constitution and by-laws and ordinances of the tribe. A 
tribal councilman, in addition to the office of tribal councilman, 
may hold any of these district offices if elected to such office by the 
voters of his district.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the district council to see that 
all nominations for tribal office, including membership in the coun
cil, shall be made in strict accord with the provisions of the con
stitution, and to certify as to the legality of such nominations, 
otherwise it shall be considered illegal and ineffective by the tribal 
council.

Sec. 3. All tribal elections for officers shall be canvassed and cer
tified by the council, or a board appointed by them, the results of 
such elections. No candidate shall be considered legally elected, 
nor shall he hold office until such canvass and certification shall 
have been made by the council within five (5) days after such 
elections.

Sec. 4. All necessary details concerning tribal nominations and 
elections not specifically covered in these by-laws or in the consti
tution, shall be more fully set forth in ordinances to be hereafter 
established by the council.

Sec. 5. Each district or voting precinct established under section 
3 of article III of the constitution are hereby outlined by legal 
subdivisions, as follows:

No. 1. Agency district.—Beginning at a point on the west bank 
of the Missouri River, following the township line west to the SE. 
corner of section 36, township 14 north, range 29 east: thence south 
to the southeast corner of section 36, township 13 north, range 
29 east; thence west to the southwest corner of said section 36; 
thence south along the range line to where it intersects the west 
bank of the Missouri River; thence north and east along the west 
bank of the Missouri River to the point of beginning.

No. 2. Bridger district.—Beginning at a point on the north bank 
of the Cheyenne River where the range line dividing ranges 19 east 
and range 20 east intersects said Cheyenne River; thence north to 
the township line dividing townships 8 and 9 north; thence west 
along said township line to the west boundary line of the Cheyenne 
River Reservation; thence south along said line to the Cheyenne 
River; thence east along the north bank of said Cheyenne River 
to the point of beginning.

No. 3. Cherry Creek district.—Beginning at a point on the north 
bank of the Cheyenne River where the range line between ranges 22 
east and 23 east intersect said river; thence north following said 
range line to the township line dividing townships 10 and 11 north; 
thence west to the southeast corner of section 36, township 11 north, 
range 20 east; thence south to the southeast corner of section 36, 
township 9 north, range 20 east; thence west to a point to the range 
line dividing ranges 19 and 20 east; thence south along said range line 
to the north bank of the Cheyenne River; thence along the bank of 
the Cheyenne River to the point of beginning.

No. 4. Red Scaffold district.—Beginning at the southeast corner 
of section 36, township 9 north, range 20 east; thence north along

13

the range line to the southeast corner of section 36, township 12 
north, range 20 east; thence west along the township line to the 
west boundary line of the said Cheyenne River Reservation; thence 
south along said reservation boundary line to where the township 
line dividing townships 8 north and 9 north intersect said boundary 
line of the reservation; thence east along said township line to the 
point of beginning.

No. 5. Eagle Butte district.—Beginning at a point on the north 
bank of the Cheyenne River where the range line dividing range 
26 east and range 27 east intersect said river; thence north to the 
right-of-way to the Chicago, Milwaukee and Pacific Railroad; thence 
along said right-of-way across section 36, township 13 north, range 
26 east; thence north following the township line to the southeast 
corner of section 36, township 14 north, range 26 east; thence west 
to the southeast corner of section 36, township 14 north, range 22 
east; thence south to the southeast corner of section 18, township 
12 north, range 23 east; thence west to the southeast corner of sec
tion 13, township 12 north, range 21 east; thence south to the south
east corner of section 36, township 11 north, range 21 east; thence 
east to the southeast corner of section 36, township 11 north, range 22 
east; thence south along the range line to the north bank of the 
Cheyenne River; thence following the said Cheyenne River in a 
northeasterly direction to the point of beginning. 

No. 6. Fourbear district.—Beginning on the west bank of the 
Missouri River at a point where the township line dividing town
ships 15 and 16 north intersect said river; thence west to the south
east corner of section 36, township 16 north, range 29 east; thence 
south along the range line to the southeast corner of section 36, 
township 14 north, range 29 east; thence east along the township 
line to where it intersects the west bank of said Missouri River; 
thence north along the west bank of the Missouri River to the point 
of beginning.

No. 7. Green Grass district.—Beginning at the southeast corner of 
section 36, township 14 north, range 26 east; thence north to the 
southeast corner of section 36, township 15 north, range 26 east; 
thence west to the southeast corner of section 36, township 15 north, 
range 24 east; thence north to the southeast corner of section 36, 
township 16 north, range 24 east; thence west to the southeast 
corner of section 36, township 16 north, range 23 east; thence north 
following the range line to the north boundary line of the Cheyenne 
River Reservation; thence west to the northeast corner of section 2, 
township 17 north, range 22 east; thence south to the south boundary 
line of township 17 north; thence east to where the range line divid
ing ranges 22 and 23 east intersect said township line; thence south 
along said range line to the southeast corner of section 36, township 
14 north, range 22 east; thence east along the township line to the 
point of beginning.

No. 8. Lantry district.—Beginning at the southeast corner of sec
tion 18, township 12 north, range 22 east; thence due north to the 
southeast corner of section 1, township 15 north, range 22 east; 
thence west to the southeast corner of section 1, township 15 north, 
range 21 east; thence south along the range line to the southeast 
corner of section 13, township 12 north, range 21 east; thence west 
to the point of beginning.

•

14

No. 9. LaPlant district.—Beginning at a point on the west bank 
of the Missouri River where the range line dividing ranges 29 and 
30 east intersects said river; thence north following said range line 
to the southeast corner of section 13, township 15 north, range 29 
east; thence west to the southeast corner of section 18, township 15 
north, range 28 east; thence south to the southeast corner of section 
31, township 15 north, range 28 east; thence west to the southeast 
corner of section 36, township 15 north, range 26 east; thence south 
following the range line to the north bank of the Cheyenne River; 
thence meandering along the banks of said Cheyenne River and the 
Missouri River to the point of beginning.

No. 10. Promise district.—Beginning at the southeast corner of 
section 13, township 15 north, range 29 east; thence north to the 
north boundary line of the said Cheyenne River Reservation; thence 
west along said boundary line to the northeast corner of section 1, 
township 17 north, range 27 east; thence south to the southeast 
corner of section 18, township 15 north, range 28 east; thence east 
to the point of beginning.

No. 11. Robertson precinct.—Beginning at a point where the north 
boundary line of the Cheyenne River Reservation intersects the 
Missouri River; thence west to the northeast corner of section 1, 
township 17 north, range 29 east; thence south following the range 
line to the southeast corner of section 36, township 16 north, range 
29 east; thence east following said township line to the west bank 
of the Missouri River; thence north along the west bank of the 
Missouri River to the point of beginning.

No. 12. Thunder Butte district.—Beginning at the southeast corner 
of section 36, township 11 north, range 21 east; thence north follow
ing the range line to the southeast corner of section 1, township 15 
north, range 21 east; thence east to the southeast corner of section 1, 
township 15 north, range 22 east; thence north following the section 
line to the north boundary line of the Cheyenne River Reservation; 
thence west following the said boundary line to the northwest corner 
of the said Cheyenne River Reservation; thence south following the 
west boundary line of said Cheyenne River Reservation to the south 
boundary line of township 12 north; thence east to the southeast cor
ner of section 36, township 12 north, range 20 east; thence south to 
the southeast corner of section 36, township 11 north, range 20 east; 
thence east following the township line to the point of beginning.
No. 13. White Horse district.—Beginning at the southeast corner 
of section 31, township 15 north, range 28 east; thence due north 
to the north boundary line of the Cheyenne River Reservation; 
thence west to the northeast corner of section 1, township 17 north, 
range 23 east; thence south along the range line to the southeast 
corner of section 36, township 16 north, range 23 east; thence east 
to the southeast corner of section 36 township 16 north, range 24 
east; thence south to the southeast corner of section 36, township 15 
north, range 24 east; thence east to the point of beginning.

Article IV—Meetings and Procedure

Sec. 1. Immediately after the election of members of the tribal 
council and said elected members are duly certified as provided for 

15

in article III, section 6, the members shall assemble at the Cheyenne 
Agency and organize for business, and appoint one sergeant-at-arms.
Sec. 2. The council shall meet regularly on the first Tuesday of 
each month. The meetings shall be held at the agency office or other 
building provided for such purpose.

Sec. 3. Special meetings of the council shall be held at such times 
as are designated by the chairman, and he shall notify the members 
at least twenty-four (24) hours before the date of such meeting.

Sec. 4. At any special or regular meeting of the tribal council 
with two-thirds (⅔) of the members present it shall constitute a 
quorum, and the council may proceed to transact any business that 
may come before it. Without a quorum the chairman shall adjourn 
the meeting.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the council shall also be held upon 
written request of either seven (7) members of the council or by 
petition signed by one hundred (100) legal voters of the tribe. Such 
written request shall be filed with the chairman or the secretary of 
the council, and he shall notify the council members twenty-four 
(24) hours before the date of such council meeting.

Sec. 6. All sessions of the tribal council (except executive) shall be 
open to all members of the tribe. Balloting at all sessions shall be 
either by acclamation or by secret written ballot, as the presiding 
officer shall direct.

Sec. 7. The council may, upon motion duly passed, go into execu
tive sessions. At such sessions all persons shall be excluded from the 
council chamber, and any such person whose presence shall be re
quired before the council shall be designated by the chairman, and 
no other persons shall be allowed to be present other than the mem
bers of the council and the secretary.

Sec. 8. The order of business at any regular or special meeting of 

the tribal council shall be as follows:

(a)  Council called to order for session.
(b)  Roll call.
(c)  Prayer by an authorized person.
(d)  Opening address by the presiding officer or by others.
(e)  Reading and acceptance of minutes of previous meeting.
(f)  Reports of standing committee.
(g)  Reports of council treasurer.
(h)  Reports of the special committees.
(i)  Reports of the board of directors or advisors.
(j)  Reading of communications and reports.
(k)  Impeachment trials.
(1)  Installation of new officers.
(m)  Unfinished business.
(n)  New business.
(o)  Appointment of committees and directors.
(p)  Adjournment.
Sec. 9. It shall be the duty of the council to exercise care and cau
tion to the end that a complete record is preserved of all acts of the 
council and of all committees appointed therefrom. Accurate copies 
of all such records shall be preserved in the files of the council and 
accurate copies of all necessary records shall be transmitted to such 
bureaus, departments, or elsewhere as may be required.

16

Sec. 10. All records of the council and its committees or delegates 
shall at all times be a matter of public record, and any member of 
the Cheyenne River Sioux Tribe or his authorized representative, or 
any properly authorized officer or employee of any Government 
department shall have full access to same during business hours. 
However, it is provided that matters before the council while in 
executive session shall be, at the option of the council, withheld from 
the public or from individuals or their representatives, until after 
same shall have been acted upon or otherwise quietly disposed of.

Sec. 11. Copies of all leases, contracts, deeds, or assignments and 
all other papers or documents pertaining to lands of any nature on 
the reservation shall be carefully preserved by the council, and inso
far as it is possible all other documents affecting the rights and 
equities of the tribe as a whole, or the individual members thereof, 
shall be kept and preserved in order that such information shall at 
all times be available to the council and to the individual members 
of the tribe; and duplications of all such documents shall be depos
ited in the files of one agency.

Article V—Tribal Court (Judicial Code)

Section 1. (a) It shall be the duty of the council to provide, 
through the necessary by-laws or ordinances, for the establishment 
of a tribal court upon the reservation.

(b)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all such petty offenses 
not falling within the exclusive jurisdiction of Federal or State 
courts, as may be provided in the ordinances of the tribe.

(c)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all Indians upon the 
reservation and over such disputes or lawsuits as shall occur between 
Indians on the reservation or between Indians and non-Indians where 
such cases are brought before it by stipulation of both parties pro
vided that jurisdiction over Indian employees of the Indian Service 
shall be subject to rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary 
of the Interior.

(d)  The duties and jurisdiction of this court shall be more fully 

prescribed by appropriate by-laws or ordinances.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the council to establish by ordinance 
a tribal police force which shall have full jurisdiction upon the 
reservation, the authority and duties of this police force under which 
it will function may be outlined by the council, such police to be 
employees of the council and shall be an agency of the tribal court.

Article VI—Relation Between Federal and Tribal Government

Section 1. The Indians of the Cheyenne River Reservation recog
nize their inability to control or assume all responsibilities of ad
ministration, such as: The supervision of health and educational 
services; employees of the Federal Government through whom we 
must make contact with the administrative office in Washington to 
manage wholly our internal affairs; and matters over which the 
tribal council has no authority.

Article VII—Law of Property

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the council to pass rules and 
regulations to prevent unauthorized prospecting or mining of any 

17

kind upon the reservation and to see that such rules and regulations 
are properly enforced.

Sec. 2. The council shall pass ordinances for the control of hunt
ing and fishing upon the reservation, not conflicting with any of the 
Federal or State game laws. The council shall enforce such ordi
nances and cooperate with Federal and State authorities for protec
tion of game on the reservation. Further, the council may issue 
licenses for hunting and fishing and shall establish and act for same.

Article VIII—Public Welfare

Section 1. Charity.— (a) The council at all times determines in 
careful manner what constitutes just cause for charity or financial 
aid or assistance to the indigent members of the tribe, and shall make 
proper provisions for recommendation to proper agencies for relief.
(b)  The council shall designate persons who shall administer 
charity work on the reservation, and the solicitation and expenditure 
of charity funds conducted in a systematic manner and that the right 
to do so may not be abused. It shall seek and cooperate with such 
charity organizations and thereby render assistance or aid to the 
poor and needy.

(c)  The council shall at all times endeavor to discuss and eliminate 
the cause for indigency, exercising wise and judicious supervision 
and management of the affairs of the finances of individual members 
of the tribe, to the end that need, privation, and financial distress 
may be entirely eliminated among the members of the tribe.

Sec. 2. Education.—(a) The council shall pass necessary ordi
nances to promote and increase learning and education among the 
members of the tribe, studying present school systems, and recom
mending plans for improving them to the proper bureaus or 
departments.

(b)  The council shall enter into negotiations with nonreservation 
schools and procure for the members of the tribe the highest type of 
educational facilities, to the end that younger members of the tribe 
shall have every possible advantage, attaining that degree of educa
tion that will fit them to meet and take part in the modern civiliza
tion and advancement.

Sec. 3. Social welfare.— (a) The council shall encourage and pro
mote among the residents of the reservation by every practical means 
a proper system of social and home education in home economics, 
hygiene, home demonstrations, agronomy and farm demonstrations, 
with the cooperation of State, county, and Federal departments, and 
agencies which seek to promote such social welfare and agricultural 
development work.

Article IX—Loans

The tribal council shall act upon all applications for loans under 
a revolving fund or reimbursable regulations for the purchase of 
property, stock, or equipment, or loans to Indians, for the payment 
of tuition for higher education or trade schools, out of the allot
ment to the Cheyenne River Reservation as provided in the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), for such purposes.

18

Article X—Application for Funds

The tribal council shall act in an advisory capacity upon all 
applications to the superintendent for the withdrawal from the 
United States Treasury of trust funds, Sioux benefits, or the Cheyenne 
River Reservation 3% funds, or any other tribal funds, may adopt 
rules and regulations not in conflict with law, subject to the approval 
of the superintendent governing withdrawal of individual Indian 
money.

Article XI—Tribal Claims

The council shall make a thorough survey, research, investigation, 
and study of the history and title of all lands which are now tribal 
in character or that have been tribal in character in times past and 
shall endeavor to reestablish the tribal equity, if any, in such lands 
so as to obtain through proper channels just compensation for such 
lands, which it shall find to have been unlawfully removed from 
the present jurisdiction of the tribe and without just compensation.

Article XII—Guardianship

The council shall pass all necessary ordinances whereby the rights 
of minors and incompetents shall be properly safeguarded, and 
shall see that the administration of such funds and other assets 
shall be for the exclusive benefit of such minors or incompetents. 
It shall be the duty of the council to make semi-annual reports 
concerning all such guardianship funds or assets, and that such 
reports be matters of public record, with the exception of the trust 
funds and individual Indian money, upon the approval of the Sec
retary of the Interior, which is deposited and supervised by the 
superintendent.

Article XIII—National Sioux Council

The tribal council shall have the further power to select delegates 
to sit in national councils of the entire Sioux Nation. Said national 
council of the Sioux Nation shall be formed by the meeting of said 
delegates whenever five (5) of the following Sioux Tribes shall adopt 
a constitution containing a provision similar to this: Standing 
Rock, Cheyenne River, Lower Brule, Crow Creek, Pine Ridge, Rose
bud, Santee, Fort Peck.

Article XIV—Adoption

This constitution and by-laws, when ratified by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Sioux Tribe of the Cheyenne River 
Reservation voting at an election called for the purpose by the 
Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, shall be submitted 
to the Secretary of the Interior, and, if approved, shall be effective 
from the date of approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 29, 1935, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws were sub- 

19

mitted for ratification to the Cheyenne River Tribe of Sioux Indians 
and were on December 7,1935, duly ratified by a vote of 576 for, and 
366 against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those entitled 
to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended by 
the act of June 15. 1935 (Public. No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Chairman of Cheyenne River Sioux Tribal Council.

Harry F. C. Woods.
Chairman of Election Board.

Luke Gilbert,

James E. HiHawk,

Tribal Secretary.

Walter F. Dickens, 

Superintendent.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached constitution and by-laws of the Cheyenne River Tribe of 
Sioux Indians.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution 
or by-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Cheyenne River 
Tribe of Sioux Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended December 23, 1935.

John Collier, 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington. D. C., December 27, 1935.

Harold L. Ickes.
Secretary of the Interior.
[seal] 

