 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE  
 
CHEYENNE-ARAPAHO TRIBES 
OF OKLAHOMA

 
 RATIFIED SEPTEMBER 18, 1937


UNITED STATES 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 

CHEYENNE-ARAPAHO TRIBES 

OF OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED SEPTEMBER 18, 1937 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1938 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE CHEYENNE- 
ARAPAHO TRIBES OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the Indians of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, in 
order to promote more unified tribal economic progress, to better 
transact our tribal business and industrial affairs, to protect our re
ligious rights, to protect and maintain our allotted lands, to look 
after our just claims and our rights under treaty stipulations, to bor
row money from the Federal Government, such funds to constitute 
a tribal revolving fund from which sums may be lent to individual 
members of the Tribes and to groups of members for cooperative 
enterprises, to participate in the management of tribal lands and 
property, to assist and advise in the purchase of land which the 
government may obtain for landless members of the Tribes. to nego
tiate with the representatives of Federal. State and local Governments 
in regard to all matters affecting the Tribes now or in the future, 
and to further the general welfare of ourselves and our posterity, do 
hereby adopt the following Constitution and By-laws pursuant to the 
Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Cheyenne-Arapaho 

Tribes of Oklahoma.

Article II—Territory

The territory in which this Constitution shall be effective is the 
lands owned by the Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians within the bound
aries of the Cheyenne and Arapaho territory as defined by the agree
ment of 1890 (ratified by the Act of March 3, 1891), and tribal lands 
or land which shall hereafter become tribal property.

Article 111—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes shall 

consist of the following persons:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

tribal census roll as of June 26. 1936.

(b) All children born since the date of said roll, both of whose 

parents are members of the Tribes.

(c) Any child born of a marriage between a member of the Tribes 
and a member of some other Tribe who chooses to affiliate with the 
Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes.

(d) Any child born of a marriage between a member of the 
Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes and any other person, if such child

is admitted to membership by a majority vote of the Business 
Committee.

Sec. 2. The Business Committee shall have the power to make rules 
and regulations, subject to review of the Secretary of the Interior, 
governing future membership and the adoption of new members.

Article IV—Individual Rights and Present Services

Section 1. Individual rights in allotted and inherited lands shall 

not be disturbed by anything contained in this Constitution.

Sec. 2. The rights of members as citizens of the United States and 
of the State of Oklahoma shall not be disturbed by anything con
tained in this Constitution.

Sec. 3. Existing aids and services extended to the Tribe, such as 
health service, education, extension service, etc., shall not be cur
tailed because of anything contained in this Constitution.

Sec. 4. In all recommendations for employment of persons to fill 
positions on the Cheyenne and Arapaho jurisdiction first preference 
shall be given to qualified enrolled members of this organization and 
second preference shall be given to persons married to members of 
the organization.

Sec. 5. All members of the Tribes may enjoy freedom of speech, 

conscience, worship and assembly.

Sec. 6. No treaty rights of the Cheyenne or the Arapaho Tribe 
shall be in any way affected by any provision of this Constitution.

Article V—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the organization shall be called 

the Cheyenne-Arapaho Business Committee.

Sec. 2. The Cheyenne-Arapaho Business Committee shall consist 
of 28 members, 14 Cheyennes and 14 Arapahoes, selected in the follow
ing manner:

(a) The Cheyenne Chiefs and Headmen shall appoint one of their 
members, a resident of the district ho shall represent, from each of 
the 7 Cheyenne districts. One representative from each of the listed 
7 Cheyenne districts shall be elected by popular vote of the eligible 
voters of the districts: Kingfisher, Calumet-Geary, Watonga, Canton, 
Thomas, Hammon, Clinton. If no chief or headman resides in a 
Cheyenne District, two representatives shall be elected from that 
district by popular vote.

(b) The Arapahoes shall be represented on the Business Com
mittee by 14 members, some of whom may be tribal chiefs. They 
must be residents of the districts from which they are elected and 
shall be chosen by popular vote as follows: 3 representatives from 
Colony. 4 representatives from Geary, 3 representatives from Green
field, 4 representatives from Canton.

Sec. 3. All members of the Tribes. 21 years of age or older, shall 
be eligible as candidates for the Business Committee, subject to re
quirements already cited pertaining to chiefs and headmen.

Sec. 4. All members of the Tribes, 21 years of age or older, shall 

be entitled to vote in all elections.

Sec. 5. Members of the Business Committee and the Chairman 
thereof shall hold office for a term of two years from date of election 

or until their successors are chosen. Cheyenne voters not residing 
within a Cheyenne District and Arapaho voters not residing within 
an Arapaho District may affiliate with any district of their own 
Tribe for purposes of voting and representation.

Sec. 6. The first election shall be called by the Superintendent 
within 60 days after the adoption of this Constitution, and regular 
elections shall be held every second year thereafter.

Sec. 7. A meeting of duly elected tribal representatives shall be 
called by the Superintendent within 30 days after the election at 
which they are chosen. At this meeting the Business Committee 
shall select the following officers from its membership: Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer, and Sergeant-at-Arms.

Sec. 8. Subject to the approval of the Business Committee, the 
Chairman shall appoint committees for the carrying on of business.
Sec. 9. Vacancies on the Business Committee shall be filled by a 
special election held in the district which has lost representation by 
that vacancy. Where the former member whose place is to be filled 
had been selected as a Cheyenne Chief or Headman, the Cheyenne 
Chiefs and Headmen will name his successor. Where the former 
member of the Business Committee had been chosen by popular vote, 
the same procedure will apply to the election of his successor.

Sec. 10. Any member or officer of the Business Committee charged 
with misconduct or negelct of duty during his term of office may be 
expelled by a majority vote of the Business Committee after a fair 
hearing.

Article VI—Powers of Business Committee

The Business Committee shall have power to act for the Tribes in 
matters pertaining to claims, credit, acquisition of land and any such 
matters in which the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes may be authorized 
to act.

Matters of importance may be referred by 14 members of the 
Business Committee to a popular referendum of the members of the 
Tribes, and until such referendum is held action on the matters 
shall be suspended.

Article VII—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority 
vote of the eligible voters at a general meeting, and if approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior shall be submitted to a referendum vote 
of the members of the Tribes and shall be effective if approved by a 
majority vote.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE CHEYENNE-ARAPAHO TRIBES OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman of the Business Committee shall preside 
over all meetings of the Committee, shall perform all the duties of a 
chairman and exercise any authority delegated to him by the Busi
ness Committee. He shall have the privilege of voting in case of 
a tie.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman of the Business Committee shall call 
the roll at the opening of each meeting. He. shall then read the 
minutes of the previous meeting. The minutes shall be approved 
by the Business Committee, after which it shall be the duty of the 
Secretary to call to the attention of the Business Committee any 
unfinished business of the previous meeting. Further, the Secretary 
shall read to the Committee all communications which have been 
received during the month by said Committee. It shall be the duty 
of the Secretary to answer all correspondence after it has been dis
cussed and a decision made by the Business Committee.

Sec. 3. The Treasurer of the Business Committee shall lie the 
custodian of all moneys which come under the jurisdiction or in con
trol of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Business Committee. He shall pay 
out money in accordance with the orders and resolution of the 
Business Committee. He shall keep account of all receipts and dis
bursements and shall report the same to the Business Committee at 
each regular meeting. He shall be bonded in such an amount as 
the Business Committee by resolution shall provide, such bond to 
be satisfactory to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The books 
of the Treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection at the discre
tion of the Business Committee.

Article II—Oath of Office

Each member of the Business Committee and each officer or sub
ordinate officer elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an oath 
of office prior to assuming the duties thereof by which oath he shall 
pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States and this Constitution and By-laws. The following form of 
oath of office shall be given : “I._____________________ _ do hereby
solemnly affirm that I will support and defend the Constitution of 
the United States against all enemies and will carry out faithfully 
and impartially, the duties of my office to the best of my ability, and 
will promote and protect the best interests of the Cheyenne-Arapaho 
Tribes in accordance with this Constitution and By-laws.”

Article III—Meetings of the Business Committee

Section 1. Regular meetings of the Business Committee shall be 
held on the first Wednesday of each month at the Cheyenne-Arapaho 
Agency at Concho. Oklahoma, or such other place as is chosen by 
the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
at the discretion of the Chairman, or shall be called by him upon 
written request of a majority of the members of the Business Com
mittee or upon the written request of 100 members of the Cheyenne- 
Arapaho Tribes.

Sec. 3. A general meeting of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes shall 
be held on the first Wednesday of the month of October of each 
year. The meeting place will be designated by the Business Com
mittee.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Fourteen members of the Business Committee, of whom 
one-half shall be Cheyennes and one-half shall be Arapahoes, shall 
constitute a quorum at any meeting.

Article V—Ratification

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of 
the Indians of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes voting at an election 
called by the Secretary of the Interior under regulations which he 
may prescribe pursuant to section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare 
Act of June 26, 1936.

I. Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Cheyenne-Arapano Tribes 
of Oklahoma.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
and By-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to the Cheyenne- 
Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended August 11, 1937

William Zimmerman, Jr., 

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington. D. C., August 25, 1937.

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved August 25, 1937 by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Cheyenne-Arapaho 
Tribes and was on September 18. 1937 duly approved by a vote of 
M2 for, and 417 against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant to section 3 of 
the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

Alfred Wilson.

Chairman, Business Committee.

.I ESSE Rowixidoe.

Secretary. Business Committee.

Chas. II. Berry.

Superintendent. Cheyenne and Arapaho Agency.
 
 

AMENDMENT TO CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 
CHEYENNE-ARAPAHO TRIBES OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Amendment i.

Article V of the Constitution and By-laws of the Cheyenne-Arapaho 

Tribes of Oklahoma shall he amended as follows:

1.  Section 2.
“Sec. 2. The Cheyenne-Arapaho Business Committee shall con
sist of fourteen members, seven Cheyennes and seven Arapahoes, 
elected by popular vote, provided that the present Cheyenne-Arapaho 
Business Committee shall serve until its successors are elected.

“(a) The Business Committee shall designate the districts from 
which its membership shall be elected and shall determine the ratio 
of representation.

“(b) Within sixty days after the ratification of this amendment an 
election shall be held, under rules and regulations prescribed by the 
Business Committee, and the members so elected shall serve until 
the next regular election in November 1943, or until their successors 
are elected. Elections shall be held every second year thereafter.” 

2. Section 3.
“Sec. 3. All members of the Tribes, 21 years of age or older, shall 

be eligible as candidates for the Business Committee.”

3.  Section G shall be omitted and the subsequent sections renum

bered accordingly.

and shall read:

4.  Section 9 will become Section 8 in accordance with No. 3 above, 

“Sec. 8. Vacancies on the Business Committee shall be filled by a 
special election held in the district which has lost representation by 
that vacancy.”

Article VI of the Constitution and By-laws of the Cheyenne- 

Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma shall bo amended as follows:

In the second paragraph of this Article substitute the number “7” 

for “14 ”

Article III of the By-laws shall be amended by adding Section 4, 

which shall read as follows:

“Sec. 4. Special meetings of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes may be 
called at the discretion of the Chairman of the Business Committee, 
but shall be called by him upon the written request of a majority of 
the Business Committee or upon the written request of one hundred 
adult members of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes.”

Article IV of the By-laws, Section 1 shall be amended as follows:
“Section 1. Eight members of the Business Committee, of whom 
 one half shall be Cheyennes and one half Arapahoes, shall constitute 

a quorum at any meeting.”

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by the Act of June 2G, 193G (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve

the attached Amendment I to the Constitution and By-laws of the 
Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended: November 6, 1941.
John Colli er,

Commissioner.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary.

[seal] 

Washington, D. C., December 11, 1941.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved December 11, 1941, by the Assist
ant Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment I to the 
Constitution and By-laws of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of 
Oklahoma, was submitted for ratification to the qualified voters of 
the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes, and on February 4, 1942, was ratified 
by a vote of 193 for, and 161 against, in an election in which more 
than 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance 
with section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 
(49 Stat. 1967).

Jesse Rowlodge, 

Chairman, Business Committee.

Guy Hobgood,

Superintendent, Cheyenne-Arapaho Agency.

Alfred Wilson, 
Secretary, Business Committee.

APR 1 1943

