 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 
OF THE 
CHEYENNE AND ARAPAHO TRIBES

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the People of the Cheyenne and Arapaho Tribes, in order to sustain and promote our 
cultures, languages, and way of life, protect our religious rights, establish and promote justice for 
all People, promote education, establish guidance and direction for our government, respect and 
protect our natural environment and resources, and advance the general welfare for ourselves 
and our posterity, do establish this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. Bill of Rights. The government of the Tribes shall not make or enforce any law 
which:

(a).  infringes upon religious or cultural beliefs or prohibits the free exercise thereof 
including the right to possess and use peyote for religious purposes, nor any law 
which establishes religion;

(b).  prohibits the freedom of speech, expression, or of the press, or the right of the 

People peaceably to assemble, and to petition the government for redress of 
grievances;

(c).  violates the right of the People to be secure in the privacy of their persons, 

houses, papers, electronic and telecommunications information, vehicles, and 
effects against unreasonable searches and seizures, nor issue warrants but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation signed by a Judge and 
particularly describing the place, person, house, or things to be searched, the 
object and scope of such search, and the person or thing to be seized, nor execute 
an arrest without probable cause;

(d).

subjects any person to search or arrest without informing them of their right to
remain silent, to have access to an attorney, to be informed that anything they say 
can be held against them in a court of law, to have these rights explained at the 
time of arrest, and to ask the arrested individuals if they understand these rights;

(e).  subjects any person to criminal prosecution or punishment more than once for the 

same offense arising out of the same incident, nor compels any person in any 
criminal case to be a witness against himself or herself;
 
 

 
 
 (f)  . discharges any person from employment without due process, or takes any private 
property or possessory interest in private property for public use, without due 
process and just compensation;

(g)  . discharges any person from employment or takes any other retaliation against an 
employee who makes public any information of misconduct by officials or 
employees of the Tribes;

(h)  .  denies to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public

trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted 
with the witnesses against him or her, to have compulsory process for obtaining 
witnesses in his or her favor, and to have the assistance of counsel for his or her 
defense subject to income guidelines;

(i)  . denies to any person in a civil proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial;

(j). requires excessive bail, imposes excessive fines, or inflicts cruel and unusual 

methods of interrogation or punishment;

(k)  . denies to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection, application, or 

opportunity under the law or deprive any person of liberty or property without 
due process of law, provided, that the Legislature shall have the power to enact 
Indian preference laws;

(1)  . singles out an individual or group for punishment without trial, or punishes 

conduct after the fact through the enactment of laws or resolutions which 
criminalize such conduct;

(m)  . denies to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the right 

upon request, to a trial by an impartial jury of not less than six persons, and all 
persons shall be presumed innocent until proven guilty in a court of law;

(n)  . denies to any person the access to his or her own personal information maintained 

by the Tribes;

(o)  . discriminates against any Person based on age, gender, religion, disability, 

familial status, sexual orientation, or social or economic status;

(p)  . denies to any Person the right to own and use firearms subject to regulation by the 

Tribes by law.

Section 2. Reserved Powers. Powers not granted to the Government shall be reserved to the 
People.
 
 

ARTICLE II - ORGANIZATION OF THE GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. Sovereignty. The Tribes possesses inherent sovereign powers of government by 
virtue of territorial integrity and democracy. The Constitution of the Tribes shall be the supreme 
law of the land. All the existing laws of the Tribes shall remain in full force and effect unless 
such laws are contrary to the terms of this Constitution.

Section 2. Branches of Government. The power of the government shall be divided into four 
branches: Tribal Council, Legislative, Executive, and Judicial.

Section 3. Separation of Powers. No official of any branch of Government shall exercise any 
power granted in this Constitution or properly delegated by law to any other branch of 
Government except as expressly directed or permitted by this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE III - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. Territory. The Territory of the Tribes shall include all lands which are held by the 
United States for the benefit of the Tribes or the People, and any additional lands acquired by the 
Tribes or by the United States for the benefit of the Tribes or the People and which are held by 
the United States for the benefit of the Tribes or the People. The lands within the Territory shall 
include all water, property, airspace, surface rights, subsurface rights, natural resources, and any 
interests therein, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent or right-of-way in fee or otherwise, 
held by the governments of the United States or the Tribes, existing or in the future.

Section 2. Jurisdiction. The Jurisdiction of the Tribes shall extend to all persons, activities, and 
property within the Territory based upon inherent Sovereignty, except as prohibited by federal 
law. Any person who enters the Territory shall, by entering, be deemed to have consented to the 
Jurisdiction of the Tribes. Every license or permit issued under the authority of the Tribes shall 
include a provision submitting all parties and their assigns to the Jurisdiction of the Tribes. Any 
employee of the Tribes shall, by accepting employment, be deemed to have submitted to the 
Jurisdiction of the Tribes. The Legislature shall have the power to assert the Sovereignty and 
Jurisdiction of the Tribes by law over all matters that affect the interests of the Tribes. Nothing 
in this Article shall be construed to limit the ability of the Tribes to exercise its Jurisdiction 
based upon its inherent sovereignty as an Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Requirements. The Membership of the Tribes shall consist of the following persons:

(a)  . All persons whose names appear on the tribal membership roll prepared pursuant 

to the Act of October 31, 1967; provided that corrections may be made to the roll 
at any time, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  . Each person of 1/4, or more, degree of blood of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of 
Oklahoma, bom after October 31, 1967, but prior to the effective date of the 
constitution and bylaws adopted in 1975, both of whose parents are members of 
the tribes.

(c)  . Each person of 1/4, or more, degree of blood of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of 
Oklahoma, bom after October 31, 1967, but prior to the effective date of the 
constitution and bylaws adopted in 1975, if such is admitted to membership by a 
majority vote of the Legislature certifying compliance with this section.

(d)  . Each person of 1/4, or more, degree of blood of the Cheyenne-Arapaho Tribes of 

Oklahoma, bom to a member of the tribes after the effective date of the 
constitution and bylaws adopted in 1975.

(e) 

. The Department of Enrollment shall keep the Membership Roll current by adding 

births and deleting deaths.

Section 2. Other Tribes. Persons who possess blood of another Indian tribe shall not be enrolled 
if they have shared in any land or money by virtue of having been enrolled as a member of the 
other tribe.

Section 3. Blood Degree. For purposes of determining degree of Cheyenne-Arapaho Indian 
blood possessed by applicants for membership, the degree of Cheyenne-Arapaho Indian blood 
shown on the October 31, 1967, roll shall govern. Corrections may be made in degree of 
Cheyenne-Arapaho Indian blood shown on the roll if a request, in writing, is received from the 
enrollee or one of his descendants, and approved by the Secretary of the Interior. The burden of 
proof in establishing a degree of Indian blood other than that shown on the roll is on the party 
making the request.

Section 4. Future Membership. The tribal council shall have the power to enact resolutions 
and/or ordinances, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, governing future 
membership and the adoption of new members.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1.  Composition. The Tribal Council shall be composed of all Members of the Tribes age 
eighteen and older.

Section 2.  Powers.

(a)  . The Tribal Council shall have the power to set policy for the Tribes and shall 

have all other powers and duties specifically provided by this Constitution.

(b)  . The Tribal Council shall have the exclusive power to approve the annual budget 

for the Tribes; provided that if the Tribal Council fails to approve or disapprove 
the annual budget within thirty days of receipt of the annual budget as approved 
in the Legislative Process, then the annual budget shall be deemed approved. The 
annual budget shall include all revenue and funds controlled by the Tribes 
including gaming revenue, and all revenue and funds received by the Tribes from 
any and all sources.

(c)  . The Tribal Council shall have the power to authorize the Governor to enter into 

treaties, compacts, or any contract.

(d)  . The Tribal Council shall have the power to establish its own rules of order 

and procedure.

Section 3.  Annual Meeting and Special Meetings.

(a)  . An Annual Meeting of the Tribal Council shall be held on the first Saturday in 

October. No other meetings of the Tribes shall be held on the first Saturday in 
October including a Special Tribal Council meeting or a meeting of the 
Legislature. The Annual Meeting of the Tribal Council shall be held in Concho. 
The Tribes shall provide bus transportation for members of the Tribes to attend 
the Annual Meeting.

(b)  . Special Meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by five members of the 

Legislature or by petition signed by one hundred fifty Members of the Tribes. All 
requests for a Special Meeting of the Tribal Council shall be submitted to the 
Coordinator of the Office of the Tribal Council. Upon receipt of a valid petition, 
the Coordinator of the Office of the Tribal Council shall call the Special Meeting. 
The purpose of the Special Meeting shall be indicated in the request for the 
Special Meeting and no other business shall be conducted at the Special Meeting.

(c)  . The Coordinator of the Office of Tribal Council shall provide notice of all 

Regular Meetings and Special Meetings of the Tribal Council at least fifteen days 
before such Meeting.

Section 4.  Procedures.

(a)  . A quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of at least seventy-five Members of 

the Tribal Council.

(b)  . At the beginning of each Tribal Council meeting, the Tribal Council shall select a 

Chairman to preside at the meeting and to facilitate the meeting, and a Secretary 
to record the decisions of the Tribal Council and publish the minutes of the 
meeting. The Secretary shall provide a copy of the decisions and minutes to the 
Coordinator.

(c)  . All decisions of the Tribal Council shall be embodied in a written Resolution. All 
proposed Resolutions shall be submitted to the Office of the Tribal Council in 
accordance with the requirements of this Constitution. The Coordinator shall 
accept proposed Resolutions at least thirty days before each Annual Meeting or 
Special Meeting of the Tribal Council. The Coordinator shall publish all 
proposed Resolutions which are submitted at least thirty days before the meeting, 
and all such Resolutions shall be placed on the agenda of the Tribal Council 
Meeting. No item shall be placed on an agenda for a Tribal Council Meeting 
unless such item has been submitted to the Coordinator in writing at least thirty 
days before the Tribal Council Meeting. The Coordinator shall accept petitions 
seeking to repeal an enacted law or Resolution at any time and the matter shall be 
placed on the agenda of the next Tribal Council meeting. The Coordinator of the 
Office of Tribal Council shall compile all approved laws and Resolutions within 
ten days of passage into a code which shall be published.

Section 5.  Office of the Tribal Council.

(a)  . An Office of the Tribal Council is hereby established. A Coordinator for the 

Office of the Tribal Council shall be selected by the Tribal Council at the Annual 
Meeting of the Tribal Council or at a Special Meeting of the Tribal Council as 
needed. Members of the Tribes interested in serving in the position of 
Coordinator shall submit an application at least thirty days prior to the Tribal 
Council Meeting. All applications for Coordinator shall be published at least 
thirty days prior to the Tribal Council Meeting.

(b) 

The Coordinator shall serve in accordance with terms and conditions established 
by the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH

 
 Section 1. Composition. The Legislative Branch shall be comprised of one Legislature. The 
Legislature shall consist of four Cheyenne Districts and four Arapaho Districts. Each Cheyenne 
District shall have one Cheyenne Legislator and each Arapaho District shall have one Arapaho 
Legislator, for a total of eight District Legislators. The Legislature shall select a Speaker from 
among its members.

Section 2. Districts.

(a)  . There shall be four Cheyenne Districts and four Arapaho Districts for purposes of 

voting by Members of the Tribes and representation on the Legislature.

(b) 

. The District boundaries shall be as follows:

(I)  . Cheyenne District 1 and Arapaho District 1. The District boundary for

Cheyenne District 1 and Arapaho District 1, which includes Seiling, 
Watonga, and Longdale, shall begin at a point located at the northwest 
comer of Kingfisher County, thence south to the north boundary line of 
Canadian County, thence west to the northwest comer of Canadian 
County, thence north three miles, thence west eight miles, thence south 
three miles, thence west nine miles, more or less, to an intersection with 
the South Canadian River, thence northwestwardly along the course of the 
South Canadian River through Blaine, Custer, Dewey, and Ellis Counties, 
to the west boundary of the Concho Area Agency area, thence north to the 
northwest comer of the Concho Agency area, thence east along the north 
line of the Concho Agency area to the place or point of beginning.

(ii). Cheyenne District 2 and Arapaho District 2. The District boundary of 

Cheyenne District 2 and Arapaho District 2, which includes Kingfisher, El 
Reno, and Calumet, shall begin at a point located at the northwest comer 
of Kingfisher County on the north boundary of the Concho Agency area, 
thence south to the north boundary line of Canadian County, thence west 
to the northwest comer of Canadian County, thence north three miles, 
thence west eight miles, thence south three miles, thence west nine miles, 
more or less, to an intersection with the South Canadian River, thence 
southeastwardly along the course of the South Canadian River to the to the 
southeast comer of the Concho Agency area, thence north along the east 
boundary of the Concho Agency area to an intersection with Interstate 
Highway 40, thence east along Interstate Highway 40 a distance of four 
miles, thence north a distance of five miles, thence west to the east line of 
the Concho Agency area, thence north along the east line of the Concho 
Agency area to a point three miles south of U.S. Highway 33, thence east 
to a point two miles east of U.S. Highway 81, thence north a distance of 
five miles, thence west to the east boundary of the Concho Agency area, 
thence north along the east border of the Concho Agency area to the north 
border of the Concho Agency area, thence west to the place or point of 
beginning.

(iii). Cheyenne District 3 and Arapaho District 3. The District boundary for 

Cheyenne District 3 and Arapaho District 3, which includes Thomas, Deer 
Creek, Weatherford, and Clinton, shall begin at the intersection of the 
South Canadian River and the east line of Custer County, thence southerly 
along the east line of Custer and Washita Counties to the southeast comer 
of Washita County, thence westwardly along the south line of the Concho 
Agency area to a point six miles west of U.S. Highway 183, thence 
northerly along a line six miles west and parallel to U.S. Highway 183 to 
an intersection with the South Canadian River, thence eastwardly along 
the course of the South Canadian River to the place or point of beginning.

(iv). Cheyenne District 4 and Arapaho District 4. The District boundary for

Cheyenne District 4 and Arapaho District 4, which includes Hammon and 
Elk City, shall begin at a point on the south line of Washita County six 
miles west of U.S. Highway 183, thence west along the south line of 
Washita and Beckham Counties to the North Fork of the Red River, 
thence northwestwardly along the course of the North Fork of the Red 
River and the Concho Agency area to the west line of the Concho Agency 
area, thence north along the west line of the Concho Agency area to an 
intersection with the South Canadian River, thence eastwardly along the 
course of the South Canadian River to a point six miles west of U.S.
Highway 183, thence southerly along a line six miles west of and parallel 
to U.S. Highway 183 to the place or point of beginning.

(c)  . Notwithstanding the District boundaries established by this Section 2 (b), the 
 eligible voters in the four Cheyenne Districts shall be permitted to alter the 
boundaries of each of the four Cheyenne Districts to achieve an equitable 
distribution of Cheyenne voters among the four Cheyenne Districts. A proposal 
to alter the District boundaries of the Cheyenne Districts shall be initiated by 
petition signed by at least thirty percent of the eligible voters of the Cheyenne 
Districts. Upon request, the Election Commission shall prepare and issue a 
petition form to a Petitioner along with the names and addresses of the eligible 
Cheyenne voters of the Tribe listed by the Cheyenne Districts including the 
minimum number of signatures required for a valid petition under this Section. 
Members of the Tribe shall have one-hundred twenty days to collect the requisite 
number of signatures on the petition. A completed petition shall be submitted to 
the Election Commission, The Election Commission shall have thirty calendar 
days to rule on the validity of the signatures on the petition, and if valid, the 
Election Commission shall submit the proposed new boundaries of the Cheyenne 
Districts to a vote in a Special Election of the eligible voters of the Cheyenne 
Districts which shall be held within forty-five days. The majority of votes cast by 
the eligible voters of the Cheyenne Districts shall determine the success or failure 
of the proposed new boundaries of the Cheyenne Districts, and if successful, the 
decision shall be binding until altered by the eligible voters of the Cheyenne 
Districts in a subsequent Special Election.

(d)  . Notwithstanding the District boundaries established by this Section 2 (b), the 

eligible voters in the four Arapaho Districts shall be permitted to alter the 
boundaries of each of the four Arapaho Districts to achieve an equitable 
distribution of Arapaho voters among the four Arapaho Districts. A proposal to 
alter the District boundaries of the Arapaho Districts shall be initiated by petition 
signed by at least thirty percent of the eligible voters of the Arapaho Districts. 
Upon request, the Election Commission shall prepare and issue a petition form to 
a Petitioner along with the names and addresses of the eligible Arapaho voters of 
the Tribe listed by the Arapaho Districts including the minimum number of 
signatures required for a valid petition under this Section. Members of the Tribe 
shall have one-hundred twenty days to collect the requisite number of signatures 

on the petition. A completed petition shall be submitted to the Election 
Commission. The Election Commission shall have thirty calendar days to rule on 
the validity of the signatures on the petition, and if valid, the Election 
Commission shall submit the proposed new boundaries of the Arapaho Districts 
to a vote in a Special Election of the eligible voters of the Arapaho Districts 
which shall be held within forty-five days. The majority of votes cast by the 
eligible voters of the Arapaho Districts shall determine the success or failure of 
the proposed new boundaries of the Arapaho Districts, and if successful, the 
decision shall be binding until altered by the eligible voters of the Arapaho 
Districts in a subsequent Special Election.

Section 3. Terms. District Legislators shall serve four year staggered terms of office. A 
Legislator shall be eligible to serve three consecutive terms under this Constitution. Upon the 
completion of the third consecutive term, the Legislator shall not be eligible to serve on the 
Legislature until a period of two years has elapsed. A partial term shall be considered a term.

Section 4.  Qualifications.

(a)  . Each District Legislator shall be an enrolled Member of the Tribes, age 25 or 

older, and shall possess a High School degree or its equivalent.

(b)  . No person convicted of a felony within the last ten years shall serve as a District 

Legislator unless pardoned.

(c)  . At time of filing a nomination petition, a candidate for District Legislator shall 

physically reside in such District. Each District Legislator shall reside in the 
District from which they are elected for the duration of their term. Each District 
Legislator shall be a registered voter in the District from which they are elected.

(d)  . A candidate for the Office of District Legislator cannot owe any money or owe 

any debts to the Tribes.

(e)  . No Legislator shall be otherwise employed in any governmental capacity.

Section 5.  Powers.

(a)  . Legislative power shall be vested in the Legislature. The Legislature shall have 

the power to make laws and resolutions in accordance with the Constitution 
which are necessary and proper for the good of the Tribes. All actions by the 
Legislature shall be embodied in a written law or resolution. All actions by the 
Legislature shall be made by a majority vote of the Legislators present unless 
otherwise specifically indicated by this Constitution. Tie votes in the Legislature 
shall be decided by the Governor. Laws and resolutions which have been enacted 
shall remain valid until amended or repealed.

(b)  . The Legislature shall have the power to override an Executive veto by a vote of at 

least six Legislators.

(c)  . The Legislature shall have the power to set its own procedures consistent with 
this Constitution. During an official session of the Legislature, a quorum shall 
not be required to pass bills pursuant to the Legislative Process. The Legislature 
shall have the power to employ Legislative staff and establish Legislative 
Committees comprised exclusively of Legislators.

(d)  . The Legislature shall enact an annual budget by law which shall include an 

appropriation of operating funds for the Tribal Council, the Executive Branch, 
and the Judicial Branch. The annual budget shall include all revenue and funds 
controlled by the Tribes including gaming revenue, and all revenue and funds 
received by the Tribes from any and all sources. The Legislature shall conduct 
one semi-annual budget assessment and shall have the authority to make 
appropriate modifications by law. The Tribes shall operate on a fiscal year of 
January 1st to December 31st. The Legislature shall have the power to raise 
revenue and appropriate funds for expenditure. Every funding item in the annual 
budget must have been previously authorized by law. No monies shall be drawn 
from the Treasury except by signature of the Governor and except upon 
authorization and appropriation by law.

(e)  . The Legislature shall have the authority to authorize and appropriate per capita 

payments to Members of the Tribes by law.

(f)  . Legislators shall file a detailed written travel report including expenses with the 

Office of Records Management for all official travel funded in whole or in part by 
the Tribes within thirty days of return from travel.

(g)  . The Legislature shall have the power to create Regulatory Commissions by law. 

Any Commission created by the Legislature shall be located in the Executive 
Branch of government. No Member of the Legislature may also be a member of 
any Commission created by the Legislature. All Commissions shall be subject to 
the laws of the Tribes. Any Commission created by the Legislature shall have the 
authority to promulgate written regulations permitted by law and in accordance 
with legislative due process. Members of all Commissions shall be selected by 
nomination by the Governor, subject to confirmation by the Legislature.

(h)  . The Legislature shall have the power to create Executive Boards by law. Any 

Board created by the Legislature shall be located in the Executive Branch of 
government, shall be subject to the powers of the Executive Branch, and shall 
carry out and execute the duties called for in the laws. All Boards shall be subject 
to the laws of the Tribes. No Member of the Legislature may also be a member of 
any Board created by the Legislature. Members of all Boards shall be selected by 
election as required by law, or by nomination by the Governor, subject to 

confirmation of the Legislature.

Section 6.  Sessions.

(a)  . The Legislature shall convene in Concho for twelve Regular Sessions of up to 

two consecutive days beginning on the second Saturday of each month beginning 
at 9:00 am. Legislative Committees may convene at any time.

(b)  . The Governor may call Special Sessions of the Legislature. All Special Sessions 
of the Legislature shall be held within a voting District. The purposes of the 
Special Session shall be stated in a notice published not less than five days prior 
to the Special Session, and the Legislature shall not consider any other subject not 
within such purposes.

(c)  . A Special Session of the Legislature shall be held annually in March. The 

purpose of the Special Session shall be to meet and counsel with all Chiefs and 
Headsmen regarding the needs and welfare of the Tribes and its Members. Each 
Chief and Headsmen shall receive an invitation to the Special Session.

Section 7.  Legislative Process.

(a). The Legislature shall adopt and follow a public legislative process for enacting all 

laws and resolutions which shall include the following:

(i)  . All legislative proposals shall be formally introduced as written Bills. All 

Bills shall include a statement identifying the specific law, if any, to be 
superceded, repealed, or amended.

(ii)  . All Bills shall be read into the Legislative Record. All Bills shall be 

published in a Legislative Calendar for at least thirty days prior to action 
on the Bill. All Bills shall be made the subject of a public legislative 
hearing prior to action on the Bill.

(iii)  . All decisions of the Legislature shall be made by a majority vote of the 
Legislators present unless otherwise specified in this Constitution. The 
Legislature shall vote on each individual Bill separately by roll call vote. 
The names and votes of each Legislator shall be recorded and published. 
Proxy voting shall be prohibited.

(iv)  . All Bills passed by the Legislature shall be presented to the Governor for 

signature or veto. All laws shall take effect thirty days after signature by 
the Governor or veto override by the Legislature unless any Member of 
the Tribes submits to the Coordinator of the Office of Tribal Council a 
petition signed by at least one hundred fifty Members of the Tribal 
Council seeking to repeal the law or resolution at the next Tribal Council 

meeting. If the Tribal Council fails to repeal such law or resolution at the 
next Tribal Council where the matter has been properly placed on the 
agenda for the Tribal Council meeting, such law or resolution shall 
become effective immediately.

(v)  . The Office of Records Management shall compile all laws and 

Resolutions into a comprehensive Code in an orderly manner that shall be 
published annually.

(vi)  . Any action by the Legislature which does not follow the Legislative 

Process shall be deemed void and shall not be implemented or enforced by 
the government, Governor, or any official or employee.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - EXECUTIVE BRANCH

 
 Section 1. Composition.

(a)  . The Executive Branch shall be comprised of a Governor and Lieutenant 
Governor. The Lieutenant Governor shall be subordinate to the Governor.

(b)  . The Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall be elected by the eligible voters of 
the Tribes. Candidates for Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall seek office as 
a team and both their names shall appear on the ballot together.

(c)  . The Executive Branch shall be comprised of Departments created by law which 
shall include at a minimum a Department of Housing, a Department of Justice, a 
Department of Law Enforcement, a Department of Enrollment, a Department of 
Health, a Department of Education, a Department of Social Services, a 
Department of Treasury which shall include an Office of Internal Auditor, a 
Budget Office, and a Finance Office, and any additional Departments created by 
law subject to the approval of the Tribal Council. The Executive Branch shall 
also be comprised of a Department of Administration which shall include an 
Office of Records Management, an Office of Personnel, a Property and Supply 
Office, a Procurement, Grants, and Contracts Office, and a Planning and 
Development Office. Each Department shall have one Executive Director.

(d)  . The Office of Records Management within the Department of Administration 

shall be located at the government headquarters in Concho. The Office of 
Records Management shall secure and maintain at a minimum the following 
Records of the Tribes: treaties, compacts, contracts, constitution, codes, 
resolutions, laws, ordinances, court opinions, elections, executive orders, memos, 
letters, rules, regulations, policies, bills, financial records, audits, audit letters and 
reports, budgets, salaries, travel records, grant proposals, grant awards, grant 
reports, maps, land records, newspapers, reports, studies, and any other 

documentary, audio, or written records. The Office of Records Management shall 
develop systems to index and access all Records maintained in the Office of 
Records Management or any other office. The public shall have the right to 
inspect any Record and shall have the right to obtain copies of any Record for a 
reasonable fee as may be set by law.

Section 2. Terms. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall serve four year terms or until a 
successor has been sworn into office. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor may serve as 
many terms in succession or otherwise as decided by the voters.

Section 3.  Qualifications.

(a)  . The Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall be at least thirty-five years old, 

enrolled members of the Tribes, and each possess at least a Bachelors degree from 
an accredited school.

(b)  . No person convicted of a felony within the last ten years shall serve as Governor 

or Lieutenant Governor unless pardoned.

(c)  . At time of filing a nomination petition, a candidate for Governor or Lieutenant 
Governor shall physically reside in a voting District. The Governor and 
Lieutenant Governor shall be residents of a voting District for the duration of 
their terms.

(d)  . A candidate for the Office of Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall submit 

copies of his or her Federal income tax returns for the previous five years and 
provide a written list of all of his or her personal and real property.

(e)  . A candidate for the Office of Governor and Lieutenant Governor cannot owe any 

money or owe any debts to the Tribes.

Section 4.  Powers.

(a)  .  The Executive power of the Tribes shall be vested in the Governor. The

Governor shall execute, administer, and enforce the laws. The Governor shall 
enforce court orders.

(b)  . The Governor shall make projections of annual revenues and shall propose an 
annual budget to the Legislature no later than June 1st of each year. The annual 
budget shall include all revenue and funds controlled by the Tribes including 
gaming revenue, and all revenue and funds received by the Tribes from any and 
all sources. Monies which have been appropriated by law shall not be drawn 
from the Treasury except by signature of the Governor. Spending government 
revenues or drawing monies from the Treasury without authorization and 
appropriation by law and without a signature by the Governor shall constitute

embezzlement and fraud against the Tribes and which shall be punishable by a 
jail term of up to one year and a fine of up to five thousand dollars per offense.

(c)  . The Governor shall have the power to negotiate and sign a treaty, compact, or 
gaming management contract which has been previously and specifically 
authorized by the Tribal Council. No treaty, compact, or gaming management 
contract shall be valid which has not been previously authorized by the Tribal 
Council. Any treaty, compact, or gaming management contract signed by the 
Governor shall be subject to ratification by the Legislature.

(d)  . The Governor shall have the power to negotiate and sign a contract, other than a 
gaming management contract, which has been previously authorized by the Tribal 
Council or Legislature. No contract shall be valid which has not been previously 
authorized by the Tribal Council or Legislature. In the event of a conflict 
between the acts of the Tribal Council and the Legislature regarding the 
authorization to contract, the act of the Tribal Council shall govern.

(e)  .  The Executive Director of the Department of Treasury shall be called the

Treasurer. The Treasurer shall safeguard and be responsible for the financial 
assets and practices of the Tribes. The Treasurer shall be bonded in a sufficient 
amount to protect the financial assets of the Tribes.

(f)  . The Governor shall ensure that an annual audit of the Tribes is conducted by a 

reputable accounting firm or certified public accountant.

(g)  . The Governor shall have the power to sign any enactment passed by the 

Legislature into law or to veto any enactment passed by the Legislature within ten 
days of passage with a written explanation of any objections; and if the Governor 
takes no action within ten days, then the enactment shall become law in 
accordance with this Constitution.

(h)  . The Governor shall have the power to nominate an Executive Director for each 
Department subject to confirmation by the Legislature, provided that if no 
confirmation vote is taken by the Legislature within ninety days of nomination, 
the nominee shall be deemed confirmed.

(i)  . The Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall not serve on any Commissions or 

Boards created by the Legislature.

Section 5. Compensation. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall receive reasonable 
compensation as established by law. No increase or decrease in compensation for the Governor 
or Lieutenant Governor shall take effect until after the next General Election except for generally 
applicable cost of living increases.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - JUDICIAL BRANCH

 
 Section 1. Composition.

(a)  . The Judicial Branch shall be comprised of one Supreme Court, one Trial Court, 
such other lower courts of special jurisdiction as deemed necessary by the 
Legislature by law, and other forums of special jurisdiction for traditional dispute 
resolution as deemed necessary by the Legislature by law.

(b)  . The Supreme Court shall be comprised of one Chief Justice and four Associate 

Justices.

(c)  . The Trial Court shall be comprised of one Chief Judge, one Associate Judge, and 

other Associate Judges as deemed necessary by the Legislature by law.

Section 2. Selection. Each Judge and Justice shall be selected upon nomination by the Governor, 
subject to confirmation by the Legislature and approval by the Tribal Council, provided that, if 
the Legislature fails to approve or disapprove a nominee for Judge or Justice within thirty days 
of nomination by the Governor, then the nominee shall be deemed confirmed by the Legislature, 
provided, further that, if the Tribal Council fails to approve or disapprove a nominee who has 
been confirmed by the Legislature, or who has been deemed confirmed by the Legislature, 
within sixty days of confirmation by the Legislature, then the Judge or Justice shall be deemed 
approved by the Tribal Council.

Section 3.  Terms.

(a)  . The Chief Justice and each Associate Justice of the Supreme Court shall serve 

four year staggered terms or until a successor is sworn into office.

(b)  . The Chief Judge of the Trial Court shall serve a four year term of office. The 

Associate Judge of the Trial Court shall serve a four year term of office. Any 
other Associate Judges of the Trial Court shall serve a four year term of office.

Section 4.  Qualifications.

(a)  .  The Chief Justice and Chief Judge shall be at least thirty-five years.

(b)  .  The Chief Justice and Chief Judge shall each possess a law degree and be

members of a Bar Association.

(c)  . The Chief Justice and Chief Judge shall not serve as a Judge or Justice on any 

other Court during his or her term of office.

(d)  . The Chief Justice and Chief Judge shall reside within the Territory during his or 

her term of office.

(e)  . No person convicted of a felony shall serve as a Justice or Judge.

Section 5.  Jurisdiction.

(a)  . The Trial Court shall have original jurisdiction over all cases and controversies, 

both criminal and civil, in law or in equity, arising under the Constitution, laws, 
and customs of the Tribes, including cases in which the Tribes or its officials and 
employees shall be a party. Any such case or controversy arising within the 
jurisdiction of the Tribes shall be filed in the Trial Court before it is filed in any 
other court. This grant of jurisdiction shall not be construed to be a waiver of the 
Sovereign Immunity of the Tribes.

(b)  . The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction over any case on appeal from 

the Trial Court. The Supreme Court shall have original and exclusive jurisdiction 
over any final determination by the Election Commission on a protest or 
challenge of the results of an election, and such jurisdiction shall include the 
power to make findings of fact and conclusions of law, and to issue all remedies 
in law and equity.

(c)  . The Trial Court and the Supreme Court shall not have jurisdiction over traditional 

religious matters such as the conduct of ceremonies or the possession of sacred 
objects.

Section 6.  Powers and Duties.

(a)  . The Trial Court shall have the power to make findings of fact, to interpret the 
Constitution and laws of the Tribes, and to make conclusions of law. The Trial 
Court shall have the power to issue all remedies in law and in equity.

(b)  . The Trial Court shall have the power to declare the laws of the Tribes void if such 

laws are not in agreement with this Constitution.

(c)  . The Supreme Court shall have the power to interpret the Constitution and laws of 

the Tribes and to make conclusions of law. The Supreme Court shall have the 
power to issue all remedies in law and in equity. Decisions of the Supreme Court 
shall be final. The Supreme Court shall convene at least once every three months.

(d)  . The Supreme Court shall have the power to declare the laws of the Tribes void if 

such laws are not in agreement with this Constitution.

(e)  . All orders, opinions, and decisions of the Supreme Court shall be written and 

published.

(f)  . The Courts shall render a final disposition in all cases properly filed.

(g)  . The Judicial Branch shall have the power to administer funds appropriated by law 

for the Judicial Branch.

(h)  . The Chief Justice shall establish rules for the Judicial Branch subject to the power 

of the Judicial Commission to modify such rules. The Legislature shall have the 
power to establish rules for the Judicial Branch by law notwithstanding the power 
of the Chief Justice or Judicial Commission to establish rules.

Section 7. Right to Appeal. Any party to a civil action, or a defendant in a criminal action, who 
is dissatisfied with the judgment or verdict may appeal to the Supreme Court. All appeals that 
are accepted for review by the Supreme Court shall be heard by the full court.

Section 8. Compensation. Justices and Judges shall receive reasonable compensation as 
established by law. No increase or decrease in compensation for Justices and Judges shall take 
effect until after the next General Election except for generally applicable cost of living 
increases.

Section 9. Judicial Commission.

(a)  . There shall be a Judicial Commission comprised of five Members of the Tribes 

nominated by the Governor subject to confirmation by the Legislature. No person 
who has been convicted of a felony may serve as a Judicial Commission Member. 
Judicial Commission Members shall serve four year staggered terms.

(b)  . The Judicial Commission shall adopt a Code of Ethics for the Judges, Justices, 

attorneys, and advocates. The Judicial Commission shall hear any complaints 
regarding Judges, Justices, attorneys, and advocates. The Judicial Commission 
shall have the power to make recommendations to the Chief Justice to discipline 
an Associate Justice, Associate Judge, or Special Judge. The Judicial 
Commission shall have the power to make recommendations to the Chief Justice 
to discipline or remove any Court clerk or other Court staff. The Judicial 
Commission shall have the power to make recommendations to the Legislature to 
remove a Judge or Justice in accordance with this Constitution. The Judicial 
Commission shall provide each person subject to discipline or removal with due 
process.

(c)  . The Judicial Commission shall have the power to regulate the conduct of lawyers 
and advocates licensed to practice in the Courts. A denial or revocation of a 
license to practice in the Courts may be appealed to the Judicial Commission 
provided that any decision by the Judicial Commission regarding such license 
may be appealed to the Chief Justice who shall make a final decision in writing.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Voters. Members of the Tribes age eighteen or older shall be eligible to vote in an 
election.

Section 2. Voter Registration.

(a)  . Cheyenne voters shall register to vote in the Cheyenne District in which they 

reside. Cheyenne voters who do not reside within a Cheyenne District shall 
register to vote in any Cheyenne District; provided that once registered in such 
District, the voter shall not be permitted to change Districts unless he or she 
establishes residency in another Cheyenne District.

(b)  . Arapaho voters shall register to vote in the Arapaho District in which they reside. 
Arapaho voters who do not reside within an Arapaho District shall register to vote 
in any Arapaho District; provided that once registered in such District, the voter 
shall not be permitted to change Districts unless he or she establishes residency in 
another Arapaho District.

(c)  .  A Member of the Tribes who possesses both Cheyenne and Arapaho blood shall

register to vote in either a Cheyenne District or an Arapaho District, provided that 
such Member may only change from a Cheyenne District to an Arapaho District, 
or from an Arapaho District to a Cheyenne District, once.

(d)  . A Member who is properly registered to vote in a District shall not be required to 

re-register to vote unless the Member establishes residency in another District or 
fails to vote in two consecutive elections.

Section 3. Election Commission.

(a)  . There shall be an Election Commission to conduct all elections in a fair and 
impartial manner in accordance with laws of the Tribes. The Election 
Commission shall select one of its members to serve as the Chairman of the 
Election Commission. The Legislature shall not have Executive or administrative 
authority over the Election Commission.

(b)  . The Election Commission shall consist of eight Members with one Cheyenne 

Member and one Arapaho Member from each District. The Members of the 
Election Commission shall be elected from their respective Districts to serve a 
term of four years. Elected officials of the Tribes shall not be eligible to serve on 
the Election Commission.

(c)  . Each Member of the Election Commission shall possess at a minimum a High 

School degree or its equivalent. No person convicted of a felony shall serve as an 
Election Commission Member.

(d)  . Members of the Election Commission who are convicted of a violation of the

Election laws or who have violated the Election laws as determined by the 
Judicial Branch shall not be eligible to serve on the Election Commission, and 
such conviction or violation shall be punishable by a jail term of up to one year 
and a fine of up to five thousand dollars per offense.

Section 4. Nominations. Each candidate for elective office shall file a nomination petition with 
the Election Commission. Each nomination petition shall contain at least ten signatures of 
Members of the Tribes who are qualified to vote.

Section 5. Candidates. Any employee of the Tribes who is a candidate for elective office in a 
Primary Election or General Election, except incumbents, shall be granted leave without pay for 
ten working days prior to any Primary Election or General Election, unless they are elected in 
which case they shall receive four weeks back pay.

Section 6. Polling Sites. All votes shall be cast at a District polling site. There shall be at least 
one but no more than three polling sites in each District. Polling sites located outside a District 
shall be prohibited.

Section 7.  Ballots.

(a)  . All elections shall be conducted by secret written ballots.

(b)  . Absentee voting shall be permitted for eligible voters who do not reside in a 

District or who are unable to vote at the polls for reasons established by law.

(c)  . The Election Commission shall properly account for all official ballots and shall 
utilize a bar code or equivalent system to ensure the integrity of the official 
ballots.

Section 8.  Procedures.

(a)  . Beginning on May 1st of an election year, nominations for elective office shall be 

open to qualified candidates. Nominations shall close on June 1st. The Election 
Commission shall make all determinations regarding the eligibility of candidates 
to seek elective office and shall publish a preliminary list of qualified candidates 
no later than June 15th. Any Member of the Tribes may challenge a name on, or 
the omission of a name from, the preliminary list of candidates by filing a written 
protest with the Election Commission by July 15th. The Election Commission 
shall decide all written protests to the preliminary list of candidates no later than 
August 1st. The Election Commission shall publish a final list of candidates no 
later than August 15th.

(b)  . The Election Commission shall publish a preliminary list of eligible voters no 

later than June 15th of an election year. The Enrollment Department and the 
Election Commission shall cooperate in the development of the preliminary list of 

eligible voters. Any Member of the Tribes may challenge a name on, or the 
omission of name from, the preliminary list of eligible voters by filing a written 
protest with the Election Commission by July 15th. The Election Commission 
shall decide all written protests to the preliminary list of eligible voters no later 
than August 1st. The Election Commission shall publish a final list of eligible 
voters by August 15th.

(c)  . On election day, the Election Commission shall ensure that all ballot boxes are 

properly secured and sealed to ensure the integrity of the ballots.

(d)  . The candidate or issue receiving the greatest number of votes cast shall prevail.

(e)  . For purposes of enforcement of the election laws of the Tribes, the Election 

Commission shall be subject to suit for non-monetary, equitable relief exclusively 
in the Judicial Branch.

Section 9. Primary Election. A Primary Election for Governor and Lieutenant Governor, and 
Legislators shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in October in odd 
numbered years. The candidates receiving the two highest number of votes in the Primary 
Election shall proceed to the General Election.

Section 10. General Election. A General Election for Governor and Lieutenant Governor, and 
Legislators shall be held on the first Tuesday following the first Monday in November in odd 
numbered years. The candidates receiving the highest number of votes in the General Election 
shall be seated.

Section 11. Special Election. A Special Election shall be held when called for by the Legislature 
by law or by this Constitution.

Section 12. Certification of Election Results. The Election Commission shall certify all election 
results within twenty-four hours of the election. A tie vote in a General Election shall be 
decided in a Special Election.

Section 13. Election Challenges. All protests and challenges to the results of an election shall be 
initially filed with the Election Commission. The Election Commission shall render a final 
determination on any protest or challenge within forty-eight hours setting forth in writing 
separate findings of fact and conclusions of law. If the Election Commission fails to render a 
final determination on an election protect or challenge within forty-eight hours, the original 
certification of the election results shall be deemed final for purposes of judicial review. An 
appeal of a final determination made by the Election Commission on any protest or challenge to 
the results of the election may be filed directly with the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court 
shall hear and decide all election appeals within twenty days, provided that, if the Supreme Court 
fails to decide such appeals within twenty days, then the decision of the Election Commission 
shall be final and no subsequent judicial review shall be permitted.

Section 14. Oath of Office. A Justice of the Supreme Court shall administer the Oath of Office 
for all newly elected officials of the Tribes on the first Saturday in January following an election. 
The Oath of Office shall require all elected officials to swear an oath and allegiance to serve all 
the People of the Tribes, to refuse all gifts or favors in exchange for official action, or to refrain 
from providing any gifts, favors, or money in exchange for political gain, and to uphold the 
Constitution of the Tribes.

Section 15. First Elections.

(a)  . Following the adoption of this Constitution, Business Committee Members whose 
terms began under the terms of the Constitution and Bylaws of the Cheyenne- 
Arapaho Tribes dated 1975, as amended, shall be considered a District Legislator 
under this Constitution.

(b)  . In the 2007 election, a Primary Election and a General Election shall be held in 
accordance with the terms of this Constitution. In the 2007 elections, the seat for 
the C-l District Legislator and the seat for the C-3 District Legislator shall be 
filled. In the 2007 election, the seat of the A-l District Legislator whose term 
expires in the 2007 shall be re-designated as the new A-3 District Legislator seat, 
and such seat shall be filled in the 2007 election. In the 2007 election, the seat of 
the A-2 District Legislator whose term expires in the 2007 shall be re-designated 
as the new A-4 District Legislator seat, and such seat shall be filled in the 2007 
election. Persons elected in 2007 to serve as Legislators in the C-l, C-3, A-3, and 
A-4 seats shall serve four year terms.

(c)  . Following the adoption of this Constitution, a Special Election shall be held to fill 
the Offices of Governor and Lieutenant Governor. The Special Election shall 
include a Primary Election to be held within thirty days after the adoption of this 
Constitution, and a General Election to be held thirty days after the Primary 
Election. Article IX of this Constitution shall not apply to the Special Election. 
The existing Election Board in office as of the date of the adoption of this 
Constitution shall conduct the Special Election. The Election Board shall provide 
reasonable notice of the Special Election including adequate time for candidates 
to file their candidacies, and shall conduct the Special Election in a fair and 
impartial manner. All eligible voters of the Tribes as of the date of the adoption 
of this Constitution shall be entitled to vote in the Special Election. The teams of 
Govemor/Lieutenant Governor candidates who receive the two highest numbers 
of votes in the Primary Election shall proceed to the General Election, and the 
team of Govemor/Lieutenant Governor candidates who receive the highest 
number of votes in the General Election shall be declared the winner. The 
persons elected together as the Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall serve 
until replaced or until re-elected in the 2009 elections. The Election Board shall 
administer the Oath of Office to the winners of the seats of Governor and 
Lieutenant Governor within three days of the certification of the results of the 
Special Election.

(d)  . In the 2007 election, the eight seats on the Election Commission shall be filled. 

The election of Election Commission Members shall be held on the date of the 
General Election in 2007. The person receiving the highest number of votes per 
District for the position of Election Commission Member shall be seated, 
provided, that any tie votes shall be decided in a Special Election. Until the 2007 
election, the Tribal Council may continue to select and employ Election Board 
Members who shall serve until replaced in the 2007 election. The existing 
Election Board in office as of the date of the adoption of this Constitution shall 
remain in office until properly replaced. No Member of the Election Board may 
be a candidate for Election Commission Member in the 2007 election. Until an 
Election Commission is elected in the 2007, the Election Board shall have all the 
duties and responsibilities as the Election Commission as indicated in this 
Constitution.

(e)  . Following the adoption of this Constitution, the incumbent Chief Judge of the 

Tribal Court, and the three most recent Justices of the Supreme Court, shall 
remain in office with the full judicial authority to act in accordance with this 
Constitution until such time as replaced or reappointed in accordance with this 
Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE X - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

 
 Section 1. Sovereign Immunity. The Tribes shall possess Sovereign Immunity. Nothing in this 
Constitution shall be deemed to waive Sovereign Immunity from suit. Only the Legislature and 
the Tribal Council may authorize a waiver of Sovereign Immunity by law. Any authorization by 
the Legislature to waive Sovereign Immunity shall be specific, for a limited scope and duration, 
in writing, and shall be limited to a maximum of one hundred thousand dollars per party. Any 
authorization by the Tribal Council to waive Sovereign Immunity shall be specific, for a limited 
scope and duration, and in writing.

Section 2. Immunity from Suit bv Parties Outside the Jurisdiction of the Tribes. The Tribes and 
its Officials and Employees acting in their official capacity or within the scope of their authority 
shall be immune from suit brought by any party not subject to the Jurisdiction of the Tribes 
except to the extent waived in accordance with law.

Section 3. Immunity from Suit by Parties Within the Jurisdiction of the Tribes. The Tribes and 
its Officials and Employees acting in their official capacity or within the scope of their authority 
shall be immune from suit except for suits in equity filed exclusively in the Courts of the Tribes 
by any party subject to the Jurisdiction of the Tribes to enforce rights and duties established by 
law or this Constitution. Any Member of the Tribes may bring a suit exclusively in the Judicial 
Branch to enforce the terms of this Constitution. Sovereign Immunity shall not extend to 
Officials and Employees acting outside their official capacity or beyond the scope of their 
authority.

Section 4. Suits Against the Legislature and Legislators. Because the Legislature has no 
authority to take executive actions except those specifically authorized by this Constitution in 
accordance with this Constitution, the Legislature and individual Legislators acting in their 
official capacity shall be immune from suit in law and equity. When the Legislature is 
exercising an Executive function specifically authorized by this Constitution, the Legislature 
shall not be immune from suit in equity filed exclusively in the Judicial Branch by any party 
subject to the Jurisdiction of the Tribes.

Section 5. Suits Against Judges. Judges and Justices shall be immune from suit in law and 
equity for actions taken in their official capacity.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Referendum. Members of the Tribes retain the right to require a Tribal Council vote 
or popular vote on any law by binding Referendum. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 
two-hundred fifty eligible voters, any enacted law shall be submitted to the voters in a Special 
Election.

Section 2. Procedures.

(a)  . All petitions seeking a Referendum vote on a law shall be submitted to the 

Election Commission. Upon request, the Election Commission shall prepare and 
issue a petition form to a Petitioner along with the names and addresses of the 
eligible voters of the Tribes listed by District including the minimum number of 
signatures required for a valid Referendum petition. Members of the Tribes shall 
have one-hundred twenty days to collect the requisite number of signatures on the 
Referendum petition.

(b)  .  Any Member of the Tribes may submit a Referendum petition to the Election

Commission. The Election Commission shall have thirty calendar days to rule on 
the validity of the signatures on the petition, and if valid, the Election 
Commission shall submit the law to a popular vote in a Special Election which 
shall be held within forty-five days.

(c)  . The majority of votes cast by the voters in the Special Election shall determine 
the success or failure of the Referendum, and if successful, the decision shall be 
binding upon the Tribes.

Section 3. Referendum by the Legislature. The Legislature shall have the power to call a 
Referendum under this Article by a two-thirds majority vote.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - REMOVAL, RECALL, AND VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Removal of Legislators by Referral to a Recall Election. The Legislature shall have 
the power to seek the removal of a Legislator for good cause by a unanimous vote of the 
remaining seven Members of the Legislature. Upon a decision by the Legislature to seek the 
removal of a Legislator, such Legislator shall stand for re-election within forty-five days of such 
decision. The Legislature shall have the burden of proving good cause beyond a reasonable 
doubt. A Legislator subject to removal by referral to a Special Election shall be provided with 
adequate notice, be informed of the charges in writing, be given an opportunity to address the 
Legislature in a public hearing, and be given an opportunity to contest the charges, and prepare 
and present a defense including presenting witnesses and other evidence. The process to seek 
the removal of Legislator shall not extend beyond ninety days. No more than one Legislator 
shall be subject to removal by referral to a Special Election at the same time. No more than one 
attempt to remove a Legislator by referral to a Special Election shall be permitted during a term.

Section 2. Impeachment and Removal of a Governor or Lieutenant Governor. The Legislature 
shall have the power to impeach and remove a Governor or Lieutenant Governor for good cause 
by a unanimous vote of the Legislature. The Legislature shall have the burden of proving good 
cause beyond a reasonable doubt. A Governor or Lieutenant Governor subject to removal shall 
be provided with adequate notice, be informed of the charges in writing, be given an opportunity 
to address the Legislature in a public hearing, and be given an opportunity to contest the charges, 
and prepare and present a defense including presenting witnesses and other evidence. The 
process to seek the impeachment and removal of the Governor or Lieutenant Governor shall not 
extend beyond ninety days. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall not be subject to 
impeachment and removal at the same time.

Section 3. Impeachment and Removal of a Judge or Justice. The Legislature shall have the 
power to impeach and remove a Judge or Justice for good cause by a unanimous vote of the 
Legislature. The Legislature shall have the burden of proving good cause beyond a reasonable 
doubt. A Judge or Justice subject to impeachment and removal shall be provided with adequate 
notice, be informed of the charges in writing, be given an opportunity to address the Legislature 
in a public hearing, and be given an opportunity to contest the charges, and prepare and present a 
defense including presenting witnesses and other evidence. The process to seek the impeachment 
and removal of the Judge or Justice shall not extend beyond ninety days. No more than one 
Judge or Justice shall be subject to impeachment and removal at the same time.

Section 4. Removal for Felony Conviction while in Office. Any person serving as Governor, 
Lieutenant Governor, Legislator, Judge, Justice, or Election Commission Member who is 
convicted of a felony while in office shall be removed from office, provided, that a person who 
is appealing a conviction shall be suspended from office without pay pending the outcome of the 
final appeal.

Section 5. Removal and Vacancy. Upon the removal of an official under this Article, the 
Election Commission shall declare such seat vacant.

Section 6. Recall.

(a)  . A Legislator shall be subject to a recall vote in a Special Election called by 

petition of at least thirty percent of the number of registered voters in their 
respective District.

(b)  . A Governor or Lieutenant Governor shall be removable by recall vote in a Special 

Election called by petition of at least thirty percent of the number of registered 
voters in the Tribes.

(c)  . Petitions seeking the recall of a Legislator, Governor, or Lieutenant Governor 

shall be submitted to the Election Commission. Upon request, the Election 
Commission shall prepare and issue a petition form to a Petitioner along with the 
names and addresses of eligible voters of the Tribes including the minimum 
number of signatures required for a valid Recall petition. Members of the Tribes 
shall have one-hundred twenty days to collect the requisite number of signatures 
on the Recall petition. A separate petition shall be required for each person 
subject to recall. The Governor and Lieutenant Governor shall not be subject to 
Recall at the same time.

(d)  . Upon receipt of a Recall petition, the Election Commission shall verify the 
validity of the signatures on the petition within twenty days. If the petition is 
valid, the Election Commission shall hold a Recall election within sixty days.

(e)  . A majority of the votes cast in the Recall election shall determine the success or 

failure of the Recall election, provided that, the official must be recalled by at 
least number of votes which elected such person to office. Upon a successful 
recall, the Election Commission shall declare the seat vacant.

Section 7. Recall Limits.

(a)  . A person who is successfully recalled from office shall not be eligible to serve in 

an elective office until a period of six years has elapsed.

(b)  . No Recall petition shall be initiated against any elected official until six months 

has elapsed from their inauguration into office.

Section 8. Vacancy in the Office of Legislator. Any vacancy in the Office of Legislator shall be 
filled as follows:

(a)  . 

If less than three months remain in the term, then the office shall remain vacant;

(b)  . If more than three months remain in the term, then the Election Commission shall 
hold a Special Election to fill the vacancy. The Special Election shall be held 
within forty five days of the vacancy. A person elected to fill the vacancy shall 
serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.

Section 9. Vacancy in the Office of Governor. Any vacancy in the Office of Governor shall be 
filled by the Lieutenant Governor who shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term.

Section 10. Vacancy in the Office of Lieutenant Governor. Any vacancy in the Office of 
Lieutenant Governor shall be filled by appointment by the Governor.

Section 11. Vacancies in the Judicial Branch. Any vacancy in the Office of Judge or Justice 
shall be filled in accordance with the terms of this Constitution.

Section 12. Vacancies on the Election Commission.

(a)  . A vacancy on the Election Commission shall be filled upon nomination of the 
Governor subject to confirmation by the Legislature. If the Legislature neither 
confirms nor denies the nominee within thirty days of nomination by the 
Governor, then the nominee shall be deemed confirmed.

(b)  . Prior to nomination, the Governor shall publish a notice announcing a vacancy on 

the Election Commission. The Governor shall allow thirty days for Members of 
the Tribes to submit a letter of interest to the Governor seeking an appointment to 
the Election Commission.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. Request for an Election.

(a)  . The Tribal Council may initiate the process to amend the Constitution by calling a 

Special Election. The Legislature may initiate the process to amend the 
Constitution by calling a Special Election by law. The Election Commission shall 
call and hold a Special Election to amend the Constitution within ninety days of 
an official request from the Tribal Council or enactment of a law by the 
Legislature.

(b)  . The voters shall have the right to request a Special Election to amend the 

Constitution by submitting a petition to the Election Commission signed by at 
least thirty percent of the Members of the Tribes age eighteen or older. The 
Election Commission shall call and hold a Special Election to amend the 
Constitution within ninety days of receipt of a valid petition.

Section 2. Requirements. The Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the voters 
who vote in the Special Election, provided, that at least thirty percent of the registered voters 
cast a vote in the Special Election. Amendments approved by the voters shall become effective 
immediately unless otherwise indicated in the amendment.

