 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

OF THE

 
 CHICKASAW NATION.

We, the people of the Chickasaw Nation, acknowledging with 
gratitude the grace and benificence of God, in permitting us to make 
choice of our own form of government, do, in accordance with the 
first, second, fourth and seventh articles of the Treaty between the 
United States, the Choctaws and Chickasaws, made and concluded at 
Washington City, June 22, A. D. 1855, and the treaty of April 28, A. D. 
1866, ordain and establish this Constitution for our government, within 
the following limits, to-wit:

Beginning on the north bank of Red river, at the mouth of 
Island bayou, where it empties into Red river, about twenty-six miles 
on a straight line below the mouth of False Washita ; thence running a 
northwesterly course along the main channel of said bayou to the 
junction of the three prongs of said bayou nearest the dividing ridge 
between Washita and Low Blue rivers, as laid down on Captain R. L. 
Hunter’s map; thence northerly along the eastern prong of said Island 
bayou to its source; thence due north to the Canadian river; thence 
west along the main Canadian to the ninety-eighth degree of west 
longitude; thence south to Red river, and thence down Red river to 
the beginning:

Provided, however, if a line running due north from the eastern 
source of Island bayou to the main Canadian, shall not include Allen’s 
or Wapanucka Academy within the Chickasaw District, then an off-set 
shall be made from said line, so as to leave said academy two miles 
within the Chickasaw District, north, west and south from the lines 
of boundary.

Article I.

Bill of Rights.

That the general, great and essential principles of liberty and 
free government may be recognized, and established, we declare that:

Section 1. All political power is inherent in the people, and 
all free governments are founded on their authority, and instituted for 
their benefit; and they have at all times the inalienable right to alter, 
reform or abolish their form of government in such manner as they 
may think expedient.

Sec. 2. All freemen, when they form a social compact have 
equal rights, and no man or set of men is entitled to exclusive, 
separate, public emoluments or privileges, but in consideration of 
public services.

Sec. 3. No religious test shall ever be required as a qualifica

tion to any office of public trust in this Nation.

Sec. 4. All men have a natural and indefeasible right to wor
ship God according to the dictates of their own consciences. No man 
shall be compelled to attend, erect, or support any place of worship, 
or to maintain any ministery against his consent. No human authority 
. ought, in any case whatever, to control or interfere with the rights of 
conscience in matters of religion, and no preference shall ever be given 
by law to any religious society, or mode of worship; but it shall be the 
duty of the legislature to pass such laws as shall be necessary to 
protect every religious denomination in the peaceable enjoyment of 
their own mode of worship.

Sec. 5. Every citizen shall be at liberty to speak, write or pub
lish his opinions on any subject, being responsible for the abuse of 
that privilege, and no law shall ever be passed curtailing the liberty 
of speech, or of the press.

Sec. 6. The people shall be secure in their persons, houses, 
papers and possessions, from all unreasonable searches or seizures; and 
no warrant to search any place, or to seize anything, shall issue with
out describing them, as near as may be, nor without probable cause, 
supported by oath or affirmation; Provided, however, that searches 
for, and seizures of, intoxicating liquors, are not to be considered 
unreasonable searches or seizures.

Sec. 7. In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall have a 
speedy public trial by an impartial jury. He shall not be compelled 
to give evidence against himself. He shall have the right of being 
heard by himself or counsel, or both; shall be confronted with the 
witnesses against him, and shall have compulsory process for obtain
ing witnesses in his favor. And no person shall be held to answer for 
any criminal charge, but on indictment or information.

Sec. 8. All prisoners shall be bailable by sufficient sureties, 
except such as may, in the opinion of the Judge of the examining 
court, be guilty of willful murder.

Sec. 9. Excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines 
imposed, nor cruel or unusual punishments inflicted. All courts shall 
be open; and every person, for an injury done him in his lands, goods, 
person or reputation, shall have remedy by course of law.

Sec. 10. No person, for the same offense, shall be twice put 
in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall a person be again put upon trial 
for the same offense, after a verdict of not guilty. And the right of 
trial by jury shall remain inviolate.

Sec. 11. The Legislature shall have the power, by law, to 
prescribe the mode and manner of persons bearing arms in defense of 
themselves or their country.

Sec. 12. No person shall ever be imprisoned for debt.

Sec. 13. The citizens shall have the right, in a peaceable man
ner to assemble together for their common good, and to apply to those 
invested with powers of government for redress of grievances, or other 
purposes, by address or remonstrance.

Sec. 14. The Legislature shall pass no retrospective law, or any 

law impairing the obligation of contracts.

Sec. 15. Neither polygamy nor concubinage shall be tolerated 

in this Nation, from and after the adoption of this Constitution.

Sec. 16. All bonds, fines and notes shall be collected by judicial 

process, from and after the adoption of this Constitution.

Article II.

Rights of Sufferage.

Section 1. No idiot, or insane person, nor any persons convict
ed of any criminal violation of law against the Chickasaw Nation; or 
after the commission of such offense, by persistently eluding the vigil
ance of the officers and avoiding arrest, shall be entitled to the privil
eges of an elector.

Sec. 2. All elections by the people shall be by viva voce.
Sec. 3. All free male persons of the age of nineteen years and 
upwards, who are by birth or adoption members of the Chickasaw tribe 
of Indians, and not otherwise disqualified, and who shall have resided 
six months immediately preceding any election in the Chickasaw 
Nation, shall be deemed qualified electors, under the authority of this 
Constitution.

Article III.

Division of the Powers of Government.

Section 1. The powers of the Government of the Chickasaw 
Nation shall be divided into three distinct departments, and each of 
them confided to a seperate body of magistracy, to-wit: Those which

are Legislative to one; those which are Executive to another, and 
those which are Judicial to another. And no person or collection of 
persons, being one of those departments, shall exercise any power 
properly attached to either of the others.

Article IV.

Legislative Department.

Section 1. The legislative powers of this Nation shall be 
vested in two distinct branches; the one to be styled the Senate, and 
the others the House of Representatives, and both together, the 
Legislature of the Chickasaw Nation. The style of the laws shall be : 
“Be it enacted by the Legislature of the Chickasaw Nation. ” 

.

Sec. 2. The members of the House of Representatives shall be 
chosen by the qualified electors, and their term of office shall be one 
year from the day of the general election. And the session of the 
Legislature shall be annual, at Tishomingo, commencing on the first 
Monday in September, in each and every year.

Sec. 3. No person shall be a Representative unless he be a 
Chickasaw by birth or adoption, and shall have been an inhabitant of 
the Chickasaw Nation one year next preceding his election, and the 
last six months thereof a citizen of the county for which he shall be 
chosen, and shall have attained to the age of twenty-one years at the 
time of his election.

Sec. 4. The Senators shall be chosen by the qualified electors 
for the term of two years, at the same time and place as Representa
tives. And no person shall be a Senator unless he be a Chickasaw by 
birth or adoption, and has been a citizen of the Chickasaw Nation one 
year next preceding his election, and the last six months a citizen of 
the Senatorial district for which he shall be chosen, and shall have 
attained to the age of thirty years at the time of his election.

Sec. 5. The number of Senators shall not be less than one-third 

nor more than two-thirds of the number of Representatives.

Sec. 6. The Legislature shall have power to prescribe the 
manner of enumerating and apportioning the number of inhabitants 
necessary for the election of Representatives to the Legislature. The 
counties of Pickens and Tishomingo, shall elect four*
 Representatives 
each; and the counties of Panola and Pontotoc shall elect five 
Representatives each, until otherwise changed by the action of 
Legislature.

Sec. 7. The Legislature shall divide the Chickasaw Nation 
into four Senatorial districts; Provided, however, until said division, 
the counties of Panola, Pickens, Tishomingo and Pontotoc, shall each 
respectively constitute a Senatorial district. And each Senatorial 
district shall be entitled to elect three Senators.

Sec. 8. The House of Representatives when assembled, shall 
choose a Speaker and its other officers, and the Senate shall choose a 
President and its other officers. And each House shall judge of the 
qualifications and elections of its own members; but contested 
elections shall be determined in such manner as shall be directed by 
law. And a majority of each House shall constitute a quorum to do 
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may 
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under 
such penalties as each House may provide.

Sec. 9. Each House may determine the rules of its own pro
ceedings; punish members for disorderly conduct: and, with the 
consent of two-thirds, expel a member, but not a second time for the 
same offense.

Sec. 10. Each House shall keep a journal of its proceedings, 
and shall publish the same. And the yeas and nays of the members 
of either House, on any question, shall, at the desire of any three 
members present, be entered on the journal.

Sec. 11. When vacancies happen in either House, the Gov
ernor, or the person exercising the power of Governor, shall issue writs 
of election to fill such vacancy.

* “ Four” was changed by act of Legislature to “ five.”

Sec. 12. Senators and Representatives shall, in all cases except 
treason, felony, or breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during 
the session of the Legislature, and in going to and returning from the 
same.

Sec. 13. The business of both Houses shall be transacted with 

open doors.

Sec. 14. Neither House shall, without the consent of the other, 

adjourn for more than three days.

Sec. 15. Bills may originate in either House, and [be] amended, 
altered, or rejected by the other; but no bill shall have the force of a 
law until it be read in each House two several days, and free discussion 
allowed thereon, unless two-thirds of the House in which the same 
shall be pending may deem it expedient to dispense with this rule. 
And every bill, having passed both Houses, shall be signed by the 
Speaker and President of their respective bodies.

Sec. 16. All bills for raising a revenue, and all appropriation 
bills for the support of the Government of the Chickasaw Nation, shall 
originate in the House of Represensatives; but the Senate may amend 
or reject them as other bills.

Sec. 17. Each member of the Legislature shall receive from the 
public treasury a compensation for his services, which may be increas
ed or diminished by law; but no increase of compensation shall take 
effect during the session at which such increase shall have been made.

Sec. 18. No Senator or Representative shall, during the term 
for which he shall have been elected, be appointed to any civil office of 
profit under this Nation, which shall have been created, or the emolu
ments of which shall have been increased during such term, except 
such offices as may be filled by election by the people.

Sec. 19. Any person who may hereafter become a collector or 
holder of public monies, and who, failing to account for the same, shall 
become a defaulter to the Government of the Chickasaw Nation, shall 
be ineligible to any office of trust or profit, until such monies are sat
isfactorily accounted for, and paid into the National Treasury.

Sec. 20. No money shall be drawn from the Treasury but in 
consequence of an appropriation made by law. An accurate statement 
of the receipts and expenditures of public monies shall be attached to, 
and published with the laws, at every regular session of the Legislature.
Sec. 21. The members of the Legislature shall receive, for 
 until otherwise fixed by law; 

their services, three dollars per day,*
and be paid out of the Public Treasury.

Sec. 22. The House of Representatives shall have the sole 
power of impeachments; and all impeachments shall be tried by the 
Senate. When sitting for that purpose, the Senators shall be upon 
oath, or affirmation: and no person shall be convicted without the 
concurrence of two thirds of the members present. Judgment in 
cases of impeachment shall not extend only to removal from office, and 
disqualification from holding any office of honor, trust, or profit, under 
this Nation; but the parties convicted, shall, nevertheless, be subject 
to indictment, trial, and punishment, according to law.

Sec. 23. All officers against whom articles of impeachmentmay 
be preferred, shall be suspended from the exercise of the duties of 
their office during the pendency of their impeachment. The appoint
ing power shall make a provisional appointment to fill the vacancy 
occasioned by the suspension of an officer, until the decision on the 
impeachment.

Sec. 24. The Legislature shall provide for the trial, punish
ment and removal from office, of all other officers of this Nation, by 
indictment, or otherwise.

Sec. 25. In conformity with the "Treaty of April 28, 1866,” 

the Legislature shall have the power to enact any and all laws 
necessary to carry into effect the requirements specified in the said 
Treaty.

*Three dollars per day, changed to four dollars per day, by law.

ARTICLE V.

Executive Department.

Section 1. The Supreme Executive power of this Nation shall 
be vested in a Chief Magistrate, who shall be styled “The Governor 
of the Chickasaw Nation.”

Sec. 2. The Governor shall be elected by the qualified electors 
of the Nation, at the time and place of elections for members of the 
Legislature, and shall hold his office two years from the time of install
ation, and until his successor shall be qualified; but shall not be 
eligible for more than four years in any term of six years.

Sec. 3. No person shall be eligible to the office of Governor 
unless he shall have attained the age of thirty years, and shall have 
been a resident of the Nation for one year next preceding his election. 
Neither shall any person, except a Chickasaw by birth, or and adopted 
member of the tribe, at the time of the adoption of this Constitution, 
be eligible to the office of Governor.

Sec. 4. The returns of every election for Governor shall be made 
out, sealed up and transmitted to the National Secretary, at the seat 
of government, who shall deliver it to the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives, during the first day of its organization, who shall 
proceed immediately to open and count the votes in the presence of 
both Houses of the Legislature. The person having a majority of the 
whole number of said votes shall be declared by the Speaker to be 
Governor. But if no person shall have a majority of said votes, or if 
two or more shall have an equal and the greatest number of said 
votes, then the said Legislature, on the second day of its organization, 
by joint vote of both Houses, shall proceed, without debate, to choose 
a Governor from the list of the names of the two persons having the 
greatest number of votes, or of the names of the persons having an 
equal and the highest number of votes so returned, as aforesaid.

Sec. 5. The Governor shall receive, for his services, a compen
sation to be fixed by law, which shall neither be increased nor dimin
ished during his continuance in office.

Sec. 6. The Governor shall have power to enforce the laws, 
assisted by the militia, if necessary. He shall have power to compel 
all the officers of this Nation (excepting the members of the Legisla
ture) to discharge the duties of their respective offices; and for any 
neglect of duty, or other misdemeanor in office, he shall suspend the 
officer so offending, until a judgment is given of acquittal or condemn
ation.

Sec. 7. He may, by proclamation, on extraordinary occasions, 
convene the Legislature; and shall state to both Houses, when assem
bled, the purpose for which they shall have been convened. He shall, 
from time to time, give to the Legislature information, in writing, of 
the state of the government; and recommend to their consideration 
such measures as he may deem expedient.

Sec. 8. In case of a disagreement between the two Houses with 
respect to the time of adjournment, the Governor shall have the power 
to adjourn the Legislature to such time as he may think proper: 
Provided, it be not beyond the time fixed for the meeting of the next 
Legislature.

Sec. 9. No person shall, while holding any office under this 

Nation, exercise the office of Governor.

Sec. 10. There shall be a seal of this Nation, which shall be 
kept by the Governor and used by him officially; and shall be called 
“ The Great Seal of the Chickasaw Nation.”

Sec. 11. All commissions shall be in the name and by the 
authority of the Chickasaw Nation, and be sealed with the Great Seal, 
signed by the Governor, and attested by the National Secretary.

Sec. 12. Every bill which shall have passed both Houses of the 
Legislature, shall be presented to the Governor; if he approve, he 
shall sign it; but if not, he shall return it to the House in which it 
shall have originated, who shall enter the objections at large upon the 
Journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such reconsideration, 

two-thirds of the members present shall agree to pass the bill, it shall 
be sent, with the objections to the other House, by which it shall 
likewise be reconsidered. If approved by two-thirds of the members 
present of that House, it shall become a law. But in each case the 
votes of both Houses shall be determined by yeas and nays. And the 
names of the members voting for and against the bill shall be entered 
on the Journals of each House respectively. If any bill shall not 
be returned by the Governor within three days (Sundays excepted) 
after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in 
like manner as if he had signed it. Every bill presented to the Gover
nor one day previous to the adjournment of the Legislature, and not 
returned to the House in which it originated, before its adjournment, 
shall become a law, and have the same effect as if signed by the 
Governor.

Sec. 13. Every order, resolution, or vote to which the con
currence of both Houses of the Legislature may be necessary, except 
on questions of adjournment, shall be presented to the Governor, and 
before it shall take effect be approved by him; or being disapproved, 
shall be re-passed by both Houses, according to the rules and limita
tions prescribed in the case of a bill.

Sec. 14. Whenever the office of Governor shall become vacant 
by death, resignation, removal from office or otherwise, the President 
of the Senate shall exercise the office of Governor until another 
Governor shall be duly qualified ; and in case of the death, resignation, 
removal from office, or other disqualification of the President of the 
Senate, so exercising the office of Governor, the Speaker of the House 
of Representatives shall exercise the office until the President of the 
Senate shall have been chosen. And when the office of Governor, 
President of the Senate, and Speaker of the House, shall become 
vacant, in the recess of the Senate, the person acting as National 
Secretary for the time being shall, by proclamation, convene the 
Senate, that a President may be chosen to exercise the office of 
Governor. When either the President or the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives shall so exercise the duties of said office, he shall 
receive the compensation of Governor only ; and his duties as President 
or Speaker shall be suspended ; and the Senate or House of Representatives 

as the case may be, shall fill the vacancy until his duties as 

Governor shall cease.

Sec. 15. There shall be a National Secretary, who shall be 
appointed by the Governor, by and with the advice and consent of the 
Senate, and shall continue in office during the term Of service of the 
Governor elect. He shall keep a fair register of all official acts and 
proceedings of the Governor, and shall, when required, lay the same, 
and all papers, minutes and vouchers relative thereto, before the 
Legislature, or either House thereof; and shall perform such other 
duties as may be required of him by law. And for neglect of duty, or 
other misdemeanor in office, shall be subject to removal from office by 
the Governor.

Sec. 16. A National Treasurer and Auditor of Public Accounts 
shall be appointed by the Governor, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Senate, for the term of two years. Their term of office to 
commence with the Governor elect. And in case of vacancy in either 
of the above offices, by death, resignation, or otherwise, the Governor 
shall have power to fill such vacancy by appointment, for the unexpir
ed term of the former incumbent.

Sec. 17. When any office shall from any cause, become vacant, 
and no mode is provided by the Constitution and laws for filling such 
vacancy, by granting a commission, which shall expire at the end of 
the Legislature, or at the next election by the people.

Sec. 18. The offices of Governor, National Secretary, Treasurer, 
Auditor of Public Accounts, and Attorney-General, shall be kept at 
the seat of government; and the Governor, National Secretary, 
Treasurer, Auditor of Public Accounts, and Attorney-General, shall 
attend at the seat of government, quarterly, and during each session 
of the Legislature, to attend to the duties of their respective offices

Article VI.

Judicial Department.

Section 1. The Judicial powers of this Nation shall be vested 
in one Supreme Court, in District Courts, and in such County Courts 
as the Legislature, may, from time to time, ordain and establish, and 
as may be deemed necessary and be directed by law.

Sec. 2. The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Justice and 

two Associates, any two of whom shall form a quorum.

Sec. 3. The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdiction 
only, which shall be co-extensive with the limits of the Nation under 
such restrictions and regulations, not repugnant to this Constitution, 
as may, from time to time, be prescribed by law; Provided, nothing in 
this article shall be so construed as to prevent the Legislature from 
giving the Supreme Court original jurisdiction in capital cases, when 
the Judge of the District Court may be interested or prejudiced.

Sec. 4. The Supreme Court shall have power to issue such 
writs as shall be necessary to enforce its own jurisdiction; and also 
compel a judge of the District Court to proceed to trial and judgment 
in a cause; and shall hold its session twice in each and every year at 
the seat of government, commencing on the first Mondays of the 
month of April and October.

Sec. 5. The Supreme Court shall appoint its own clerk, who 
shall hold his office for four years, and be subject to removal by the 
said Court for neglect of duty, misdemeanor in office, and such other 
causes as may he prescribed by law.

Sec. 6. The Legislature shall, by joint vote of both Houses, 
elect the Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts, a majority of the 
whole number in joint vote being necessary to a choice. The Judges 
of the Supreme and Circuit Courts shall be at least 30 years of age. 
They shall hold their office during the term of four years from the date 
of their commission.

Sec. 7. The Circuit Court shall have original jurisdiction over 
all criminal cases which shall not be otherwise provided for by law, 
and exclusive original jurisdiction of all crimes amounting to felony, 

and original jurisdiction of all civil cases which shall not be cognizable 
before County Judges, until otherwise directed by the Legislature; an 
original jurisdiction in all matters of controversy where the sum or 
amount in dispute is over one hundred dollars. It shall hold its term 
in such place in each county as may be by law directed.

Sec. 8. Each county of this Nation shall constitute one Judicial 

District, until otherwise provided for by law.

Sec. 9. The Circuit Courts shall have power to issue all writs 
necessary to enforce their own jurisdiction, and have a superintending 
control and jurisdiction over County Courts, and of all cases of divorce, 
and of all suits, complaints and pleas whatever, without regard to any 
distinction between law and equity.

Sec. 10. There shall be a Clerk of the District Court for each 
county, who shall have their appointment from the District Judge, 
and shall hold his office for two years.

Sec. 11. The Judges of the Supreme Court and District Courts 
shall receive such compensation for their services as may be provided 
for by law; and such salaries shall not be increased or diminished dur
ing their continuance in office.

Sec. 12. There shall be established in each county in this 
Nation, a Court, to be called the County Court, which shall have 
jurisdiction in all matters in controversy in any sum not exceeding the 
value of one hundred dollars.

Sec. 13. There shall be elected, by the qualified electors of the 
respective counties, a Judge of the County Court, to be commissioned 
by the Governor, and hold his office for the term of two years, and 
until his successor is elected and qualified. He shall, in addition to 
the duties that may be required of him by law, as a presiding Judge of 
the County Court, be a Judge of Probate Court, and have such jurisdic
tion in matters relative to the estate of deceased persons; to appoint 
guardians, granting letters testamentary and of administration; to 
settle the accounts of executors and administrators and guardians; 
and the District Court shall have original and appellate jurisdiction, 
and general control over the said County Court, under such regulations 
as may be prescribed by law.

Sec. 14. In the trial of all causes in equity in the District Court, 
the plaintiff or defendant shall, upon application made in open Court, 
have the right of trial by jury, to be governed by the rules and regula
tions prescribed in trials at law.

Sec. 15. No Judge shall sit in any case wherein he may be 
interested, or where either of the parties may be connected with him 
by affinity or consanguinity within such degrees as may be prescribed 
by law, or where he shall have been of counsel in the cause. When the 
Supreme Court, or any two of its members, shall be thus disqualified 
to hear and determine any cause or causes in said Court, by reason of- the 
equal division of opinion of said Judges, the same shall be certified to 
the Governor of the Nation, who shall immediately commission the 
requisite number of persons for the trial and determination of said 
case or cases. When the Judges of the District Court are thus dis
qualified, the parties in controversy may, by consent, appoint a proper 
person to try the case, but in case of disagreement to appoint a proper 
person by the parties, the same shall be certified to the Governor, to be 
proceeded with as in the case of Supreme Judges. The disqualification 
of Judges of County Courts shall be remedied as may hereafter be by 
law prescribed.

Sec. 16. There shall be one District Attorney elected, by the 
qualified electors of this Nation, who shall hold his office for two years, 
and his duties, salary and perquisites shall be prescribed by law. He 
shall also act as Attorney-General for the Nation.

Sec. 17. There shall be elected, by the qualified electors of each 
county, one Sheriff and a sufficient number of Constables, who shall 
hold their office for two years; and the duties and perquisites shall be 
prescribed by law. The Sheriff shall not be eligible more than four 
years in every six.

Sec. 18. All Judges of the several courts of this Nation shall, 
by virtue of their offices, be conservators of the peace throughout the 
Nation. The style of all writs and process, shall be “The Chickasaw 
Nation.” All prosecutions shall be carried on “ In the name, and by 
the authority of the Chickasaw Nation, ” and conclude “Against the 
peace and dignity of the Nation.”

GENERAL PROVISIONS.

Section 1. Members of the Legislature, and all officers, shall 
take the following oath or affirmation, before they enter upon the 
duties of their office : “I(A. B.), do solemnly swear (or affirm ) that 
I will faithfully and impartially discharge and perform all the duties 
incumbent upon me, as---- , according to the best of my skill and 
ability, agreeably to the Constitution and laws of the Chickasaw 
Nation, so help me God.”

Sec. 2. Treason against this Nation shall consist only in levying 
war against it, or in adhering to. its enemies, giving them aid and 
comfort. And no person shall be convicted of treason unless on the 
testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or his own confession 
in open court. And any person guilty of treason shall suffer death.

Sec. 3. All property, both real and personal, of the wife owned 
and claimed by her before marriage, and that acquired afterwards by 
gift, devise or descent, shall be her separate property. And laws shall 
be passed more clearly defining the rights of the wife, in relation, as 
well as to her separate property as that held in common with her hus
band. Laws shall also be passed providing for the registration of the 
wife’s separate property.

Sec. 4. Divorces from the bonds of matrimony shall not lie 
granted, but in cases provided for by law, by suit in the District Court 
of this Nation.

Sec. 5. The Legislature shall determine the number of Annuity 
Captains, as well as to prescribe the mode and manner they shall be 
chosen, to superintend the payments of Chickasaw annuities.

Sec. 6. Every person shall be disqualified from holding any 
office or place of honor or profit, under the authority of this Nation, 
who shall be convicted of having given or offered any bribe to procure 
his election or appointment. Laws shall be made to exclude from 

office and from suffrage, and provide for the mode and manner of pun
ishing those who may hereafter be convicted of bribery, perjury, or 
other high crimes and misdemeanors.

Sec. 7. That every white person, who having married a Chicka
saw Indian, or who has been adopted by the Legislative authorities of 
said Nation shall be entitled to all the rights, privileges and immuni
ties guaranteed to them only by the thirty-eighth Article of the Treaty 
of 1866, with the Choctaw and Chickasaw Indians.

Sec. 8. No person, but a citizen, shall hold any office of profit 
created, or which may hereafter be created, under this Constitution; 
and no citizen shall fill more than one office at the same time.

Sec. 9. No retrospective payments shall be made out of the 
Chickasaw monies, to any person herein adopted, or which may here
after be adopted under this Constitution.

Sec. 10. The Legislature shall have power, by law, to admit or 
adopt, as citizens of this Nation, such persons as may be acceptable to 
the people at large.

Sec. 11. Whenever two-thirds of both branches of the Leg
islature deem it necessary, they may propose amendments to this 
Constitution; and if two-thirds of both branches of the succeeding 
Legislature approve such amendments, they shall be engrafted to, and 
form a part of this Constitution.

Sec. 12. The Legislature shall provide for the election of all 
officers necessary to carry into effect the general and specific powers of 
the several courts of this Nation, not otherwise provided for in this 
Constitution.

Sec. 13. The Legislature shall prescribe the manner of making 

marriage lawful.

Sec. 14. The Legislature shall limit the annual rate of interest 

on written obligations for the payment of money.

Sec. 15. All general elections by the people for officers under 
this Constitution shall be held on the second Wednesday in August, in 
each year. The Legislature shall prescribe the manner of conducting 
said elections.

Sec. 16. That no inconvenience may arise from the political 
separation between the Choctaws and Chickasaws, it is hereby declared, 
that all rights, privileges, and immunities of citizens secured under 
the “5th Article of the Treaty of June 22, 1855,” to all Choctaws who 
are now, or may hereafter become residents within the limits of the 
Chickasaw Nation, are fully recognized and protected. And all the 
rights of property acquired by virtue of the Constitution and laws of 
the Choctaw Nation, shall remain precisely in the same situation they 
were before the adoption of this Constitution.

Sec. 17. The Legislature shall provide for the confinement of 
convicts, or persons accused of crime, previous to trial. Also the 
manner of punishment for all crimes and misdemeanors committed 
against the laws of this Nation.

Sec. 18. The oath of office may be administered by any Judge 

of this Nation.

Sec. 19. All rights and powers not herein granted or expressed, 
are reserved unto the people; and any law that may be passed contrary 
to the provisions of this Constitution shall be null and void.

PUBLIC EDUCATION.

Section 1. A general diffusion of knowledge being essential to 
the preservation of the rights and liberties of the people, it shall be 
the duty of the Legislature of this Nation to make suitable provisions 
for the support and maintenance of Public Schools.

Sec. 2. A Superintendent of Public Instruction shall be elected 
by joint vote of both Houses of the Legislature, who shall keep his 
office at the seat of government, and shall hold his office for the term 
of four years from the date of his election, whose duties shall be pre
scribed by law, and shall receive such compensation as the Legislature 
may direct.

Sec. 3. The Legislature shall encourage, by all suitable means, 
the promotion of intellectual, scientific, moral and agricultural im
provement, and such other means as shall be inviolably appropriated 
to the support of general education throughout this Nation.

Sec. 4. All contracts which may be made and entered into 
between the Board of Trustees of Public Schools, and that of the 
Teachers shall be binding; subject, however, to the approval or 
disapproval of the Legislature.

Done in Convention at Camp Harris, this sixteenth day of 

August. 1867.

CHAS. P. H. PERCY. President.
THOMAS DrEUNEN,
 
 
EDMUND PERRY,

 
 Secretaries.

