 
  
 CONSTITUTION, 
 

LAWS,

A ND

TREATIES

ON THE

CHICKASAWS,

 
 BY AUTHORITY.

TISHOMINGO CITY: 

PRINTED BY E. J. FOSTER.

1 860.

CONSTITUTION.

We, the people of the Chickasaw Nation, acknowledging with 
gratitude the grace and beneficence of God, in permitting 
us to make choice of our own form of Government, do, in 
accordance with the first, second, fourth and seventh arti
cles of the Treaty between the United States, the Choc
taws and Chickasaws, made and concluded at Washington 
City, June 22d, A. D. 1855, ordain and establish this Con
stitution for our Government, within the following limits, 
to wit: Beginning on the north bank of Red River, at the 
mouth of Island Bayou, where it empties into Red River, 
about twenty-six miles on a straight line below the mouth 
of False Washita; thence running a north-westerly course 
along the main channel of said Bayou to the junc
tion of the Three Prongs of said Bayou nearest the divi
ding ridge between Washita and Low Blue Rivers, as laid 
down on Capt. R. L. Hunter’s Map; thence northerly 
along the eastern prong of said Island Bayou to its source; 
thence due north to the Canadian River; thence west along 
the main Canadian to the ninety-eighth degree of west 
longitude; thence south to Red River, and thence down 
Red River to the beginning; Provided, however, if a line 
running due north from the eastern source of Island Bayou 
to the main Canadian, shall not include Allen’s or Wapa 
nacka Academy within the Chickasaw District, then an off
set shall be made from said line, so as to leave said Acade
my two miles within the Chickasaw District, north, west 
and south from the lines of boundary.

ARTICLE 1.

BILL OF RIGHTS.

That the general, great and essential principles of liberty 
and free government may be recognized and established, we 
declare that

Sec. 1. All political power is inherent in the people, and 
all free governments are founded on their authority, and in
stituted for their benefit; and they have at all times the ina
lienable right to alter, reform or abolish their form of govern
ment in such manner as they may think expedient.

Sec. 2. All freemen, when they form a social compact, 
have equal rights, and no man or set of men is entitled to 
exclusive, separate, public emoluments or privileges, but in 
consideration of public services.

Sec. 3. No religious test shall ever be required as a quali

fication to any office of public trust in this Nation.

Sec. 4. All men have a natural and indefeasible right to 
worship God according to the dictates of their own conscien
ces. No man shall be compelled to attend, erect, or support 
any place of worship, or to maintain any ministry against his 
consent. No human authority ought, in any case whatever, 
to control or interfere with the rights of conscience in mat
ters of religion, and no preference shall ever be given by law 
to any religious society, or mode of worship; but it shall 
be the duty of the Legislature to pass such laws as shall be 
necessary to protect every religious denomination in the 
peaceable enjoyment of their own mode of worship.

Sec. 5. Every citizen shall be at liberty to speak, write, 
or publish his opinions on any subject, being responsible for 
the abuse of that privilege: and no law shall ever be passed 
curtailing the liberty of speech, or of the press.

Sec. 6. The people shall be secure in their persons, hous
es, papers and possessions, from all unreasonable searches or 
seizures ; and no warrant to search any place, or to seize any 
thing, shall issue without describing them, as near as may 
be, nor without probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation; 

 Provided, however, that searches for, and seizures of, 
intoxicating liquors, are not to be considered unreasonable 
searches or seizures.

Sec. 7. In all criminal prosecutions the accused shall have 
a speedy public trial, by an impartial jury. He shall not be 
compelled to give evidence against himself. He shall have 
the right of being heard by himself or counsel, or both; 
shall be confronted with the witnesses against him, and shall 
have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor. 
And no person shall be holden to answer for any criminal 
charge, but on indictment or information.

Sec. 8. All prisoners shall be baleable by sufficient sure
ties, except such as may, in the opinion of the Judge of the 
examining court, be guilty of wilful murder.

Sec. 9. Excessive bail shall not be required, nor exces
sive fines imposed, nor cruel or unusual punishments inflic 
ted. All courts shall be open ; and every person for an in
jury done him in his lands, goods, person or reputation, shall 
have remedy by course of law.

Sec. 10. No person, for the same offence, shall be twice 
put in jeopardy of life or limb; nor shall a person be again 
put upon trial for the same offence, after a verdict of not 
guilty. And the right of trial by jury shall remain invio
late.

Sec. 11. The Legislature shall have the power, by law, to 
prescribe the mode and manner of persons bearing arms in 
defence of themselves or their country.

Sec. 12. No person shall ever be imprisoned for debt.
Sec. 13. The citizens shall have the right, in a peaceable 
manner, to assemble together for their common good, and to 
apply to those invested with powers of government for re
dress of grievances, or other purposes, by address or remon
strance.

Sec. 14. No power of suspending the laws of this Nation 
shall be exercised, except by the Legislature or its authority.
Sec. 15. The Legislature shall pass no retrospective law, 

or any law impairing the obligation of contracts.

Sec. 16. Polygamy shall not be tolerated in this Nation 

from and after the adoption of this constitution.

ARTICLE 2.

RIGHTS OF SUFFRAGE.

Sec. 1. No idiot, or insane person or persons, convicted of 
any infamous crime, shall be entitled to the privileges of an 
elector.

Sec. 2. All elections by the people shall be by viva voce.
Sec. 3. All free male persons of the age of nineteen years 
and upwards, who are by birth or adoption members of the 
Chickasaw tribe of Indians, who shall have resided six 
months immediately preceding any election in the Chickasaw 
Nation, shall be deemed qualified electors; Provided, howev
er, That all Chickasaws who desire, shall be entitled to vote 
in the first general election held in the Chickasaw Nation 
under the authority of this constitution.

Sec. 4. Electors, in all cases, shall be privileged from ar
rest during their attendance at elections, in going to, and re
turning from the same, except in cases of treason, felony, or 
breach of the peace.

ARTICLE 3.

DIVISION OF THE POWERS OF GOVERNMENT.

Section 1. The powers of the government of the Chicka
saw Nation shall be divided into three distinct departments, 
and each of them confided to a separate body of magistracy, 
to wit: Those which are Legislative to one ; those which are 
Executive to another, and those which are Judicial to ano
ther. And no person, or collection of persons, being one of 
those departments, shall exercise any power properly attached 
to either of the others, except in the instances herein ex
pressly permitted.

ARTICLE 4.

LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT.

Section 1. The Legislative powers of this Nation shall be 
vested in two distinct branches; the one to be styled the Sen
ate, and the other the House of Representatives; and both 
together, the Legislature of the Chickasaw Nation. The style 
of the laws shall be: “Be it enacted by the Legislature of 
the Chickasaw Nation.”

Sec. 2. The members of the House of Representatives 
shall be chosen by the qualified electors, and their term of 
office shall be one year from the day of the general election. 
And the session of the Legislature shall be annual, at Tisho
mingo ; commencing on the first Monday in October, in each 
and every year.

Sec. 3. No person shall be a Representative unless he be 
a Chickasaw by birth or adoption, and shall have been an in
habitant of the Chickasaw Nation one year next preceding 
his election, and the last six months thereof a citizen of the 
county for which he shall be chosen, and shall have attained 
to the age of twenty-one years at the time of his election.

Sec. 4. The Senators shall be chosen by the qualified elec
tors for the term of two years, at the same time and place 
as Representatives. And no person shall be a Senator un
less he be a Chickasaw by birth or adoption, and have been 
a citizen of the Chickasaw Nation one year next preceding 
his election, and the last six months a citizen of the senato
rial district for which he shall be chosen, and shall have at
tained to the age of thirty years at the time of his election.
Sec. 5. The number of Senators shall not be less than 
one-third nor more than two-thirds of the number of Repre
sentatives.

Sec. 6. The Legislature shall have power, by law, to pre
scribe the mode and manner of enumerating and apportion
ing the number of inhabitants necessary for the election of 
Representatives to the Legislature; Provided, however, no 

county shall have less than one Representative until the first 
enumeration and apportionment by the Legislature. The 
following shall be the apportionment of Representatives 
among the several counties, viz : the counties of Pickens and 
Tishomingo shall elect four Representatives each ; the coun
ties of Panola and Pontotoc shall elect five Representatives 
each.

Sec. 7. The Legislature shall divide the Chickasaw Na
tion into four senatorial districts; Provided, however, until 
said division, the counties of Panola, Pickens, Tishomingo 
and Pontotoc shall each respectively constitute a senatorial 
district. And each senatorial district shall be entitled to 
elect three Senators.

Sec. 8. The House of Representatives, when assembled, 
shall choose a Speaker and its other officers, and the Sen
ate shall choose a President and its officers. And each 
House shall judge of the qualifications and elections of its 
own members ; but contested elections shall be determined 
in such manner as shall be directed by law. And a majority 
of each House shall constitute a quorum to do business, but 
a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and may 
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner 
and under such penalties as each House may provide.

Sec. 9. Each House may determine the rules of its own 
proceeding; punish members for disorderly conduct; and, 
with the consent of two-thirds, expel a member, but not a 
second time for the same offence.

Sec. 10. Each House shall keep a journal of its proceed
ings and publish the same. And the yeas and nays of the 
members of either House, on any question, shall, at the de
sire of any three members present, be entered on the jour
nal.

Sec. 11. When vacancies happen in either House, the 
Governor, or the person exercising the power of Governor, 
shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancy.

Sec. 12. Senators and Representatives shall, in all cases, 
except treason, felony, or breach of the peace, be privileged 

from arrest during the session of the Legislature, and in go
ing to and returning from the same.

Sec. 13. The doors of each House shall be open, except 

the Legislature have a treaty under consideration.

Sec. 14. Neither House shall, without the consent of the 

other, adjourn for more than three days.

Sec. 15. Bills may originate in either House, and amend
ed, altered or rejected by the other; but no bill shall have 
the force of a law until it be read in each House two several 
days, and free discussion allowed thereon, unless two-thirds 
of the House in which the same shall be pending may deem 
it expedient to dispense with this rule. And every bill hav
ing passed both Houses, shall be signed by the Speaker and 
President of their respective bodies.

Sec. 16. All bills for raising a revenue for the support of 
the government of the Chickasaw Nation shall originate in 
the House of Representatives, but the Senate may amend or 
reject them as other bills.

Sec. 17. Each member of the Legislature shall receive 
from the public treasury a compensation for his services, 
which may be increased or diminished by law; but no increase 
of compensation shall take effect during the session at which 
such increase shall have been made.

Sec. 18. No Senator or Representative shall, during the 
term for which he shall have been elected, be appointed to 
any civil office of profit under this Nation, which shall have 
been created, or the emoluments of which shall have been 
increased during such term; except such offices as may be 
filled by elections by the people.

Sec. 19. No person, who may hereafter be a collector, or 
holder of public moneys, shall have a seat in either House of 
the Legislature, or hold any other office created under the 
constitution, until such person shall have accounted for, and 
paid into the treasury, all such sums for which he may be 
accountable.

Sec. 20. No money shall be drawn from the treasury but 
in consequence of an appropriation made by law. An ac

curate statement of the receipts and expenditures of public 
moneys shall be attached to, and published with the laws, at 
every regular session of the Legislature.

Sec. 21. The members of the Legislature shall receive, 
for their services, three dollars per day, until otherwise fixed 
by law; and be paid out of the public treasury.

Sec. 22. The House of Representatives shall have the sole 
power of impeachments; and all impeachments shall be 
tried by the Senate. When sitting for that purpose, the 
Senators shall be upon oath or affirmation; and no person 
shall be convicted without the concurrence of two-thirds of 
the members present. Judgment in cases of impeachment 
shall not extend only to removal from office, and disqualifi
cation from holding any office of honor, trust, or profit, under 
this Nation; but the parties convicted shall, nevertheless, be 
subject to indictment, trial, and punishment, according to 
law.

Sec. 23. All officers against whom articles of impeach
ment may be preferred shall be suspended from the exercise 
of the duties of their office during the pendency of their im
peachment. The appointing power shall make a provisional 
appointment to fill the vacancy occasioned by the suspension 
of an officer, until the decision on the impeachment.

Sec. 24. The Legislature shall provide for the trial, pun
ishment, and removal from office, of all other officers of this 
Nation, by indictment or otherwise.

ARTICLE 5.

executive department.

Sec. 1. The Supreme Executive power of this Nation 
shall be vested in a Chief Magistrate, who shall be styled 
“The Governor of the Chickasaw Nation.”

Sec. 2. The Governor shall be elected by the electors of 
the Nation, at the time and places of elections for members 
of the Legislature, and shall hold his office two years from 
the time of his installation, and until his successor shall be 

qualified; but shall not be eligible for more than four years 
in any term of six years.

Sec. 3. No person shall be eligible to the office of Governor 
unless he shall have attained the age of thirty years, and shall 
have been a resident of this Nation for one year next preced
ing his election. Neither shall any person, except a Chicka
saw, by birth, or an adopted member of the tribe, at the time 
of the adoption of this constitution, be eligible to the office 
of Governor.

Sec. 4. The returns of every election for Governor shall 
be made out, sealed up, and transmitted to the National Se
cretary, at the seat of Government, who shall deliver it to 
the Speaker of the House of Representatives, during the first 
day of its organization, who shall proceed immediately to 
open and count the votes in the presence of both Houses of 
the Legislature. The person having a majority of the whole 
number of said votes shall be declared by the Speaker to be 
Governor. But if no person shall have a majority of said 
votes, or if two or more shall have an equal and the greatest 
number of said votes then said Legislature, on the second 
day of its organization, by joint vote of both Houses, shall 
proceed, without debate, to choose a Governor from a list of 
the names of the two persons having the greatest number of 
votes, or of the names of the persons having an equal and 
highest number of votes, so returned, as aforesaid.

Sec. 5. The Governor shall receive for his services a com
pensation, to be fixed by law, which shall neither be increased 
nor diminished during his continuance in office. The first 
Governor shall receive an annual salary of seven hundred 
and fifty dollars, and no more.

Sec. 6. He shall take care that the laws be faithfully exe

cuted.

Sec. 7. He may, by proclamation, on extraordinary oc
casions, convene the Legislature; and shall state to both 
Houses, when assembled, the purpose for which they shall 
have been convened. He shall, from time to time, give to 
the Legislature information, in writing, of the state of the Government

 and recommend to their consideration such mea

sures as he may deem expedient.

Sec. 8. In case of a disagreement between the two Houses 
with respect to the time of adjournment, the Governor shall 
have the power to adjourn the Legislature to such time as he 
may think proper : Provided, it be not beyond the time fixed 
for the meeting of the next Legislature.

Sec. 9. No person shall, while holding any office under 

this Nation, exercise the office of Governor.

Sec. 10. There shall be a seal of this Nation, which shall 
be kept by the Governor, and used by him officially; and 
shall be called “The Great Seal of the Chickasaw Nation.”

Sec. 11. All commissions shall be in the name and by 
authority of the Chickasaw Nation, and be sealed with the 
Great Seal, signed by the Governor, and attested by the Na
tional Secretary.

Sec. 12. Every bill which shall have passed both Houses 
of the Legislature, shall be presented to the Governor; if he 
approve, he shall sign it; but if not, he shall return it to the 
House in which it shall have originated, who shall enter the 
objections at large upon the Journal, and proceed to recon
sider it. If, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of the 
members present shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent, 
with the objections, to the other House, by which it shall 
likewise be reconsidered. If approved by two-thirds of the 
members present of that House, it shall become a law. But 
in each case, the votes of both Houses shall be determined by 
yeas and nays. And the names of the members voting for 
and against the bill, shall be entered on the Journals of each 
House respectively. If any bill shall not be returned by the 
Governor within three days (Sundays excepted,) after it 
shall have been presented to him, the same shall be a law, in 
like manner as if he had signed it. Every bill presented to 
the Governor one day previous to the adjournment of the 
Legislature, and not returned to the House in which it origi
nated, before its adjournment, shall become a law, and have 
the same force and effect as if signed by the Governor.

Sec. 13. Every order, resolution, or vote, to which the con
currence of both Houses of the Legislature may be necessary, 
except on questions of adjournment, shall be presented to the 
Governor, and before it shall take effect be approved by him ; 
or being disapproved, shall be re-passed by both Houses, ac
cording to the rules and limitations prescribed in the case of 
a bill.

Sec. 14. Whenever the office of Governor shall become 
vacant by death, resignation, removal from office, or other
wise, the President of the Senate shall exercise the office of 
Governor until another Governor shall be duly qualified; 
and in case of the death, resignation, removal from office, or 
other disqualification of the President of the Senate, so exer
cising the office of Governor, the Speaker of the House of 
Representatives shall exercise the office until the President 
of the Senate shall have been chosen. And when the office 
of Governor, President of the Senate, and Speaker of the 
House, shall become vacant, in the recess of the Senate, the 
person acting as National Secretary for the time being shall, 
by proclamation, convene the Senate, that a President may 
be chosen to exercise the office of Governor. When either 
the President or Speaker of the House of Representatives 
shall so exercise the duties of said office, he shall receive the 
compensation of Governor only; and his duties as President, 
or Speaker shall be suspended; and the Senate or House of 
Representatives, as the case may be, shall fill the vacancy 
until his duties as Governor shall cease.

Sec. 15. There shall be a National Secretary, who shall be 
appointed by the Governor, by and with the advice and con
sent of the Senate, and shall continue in office during the term 
of service of the Governor elect. He shall keep a fair register 
of all official acts and proceedings of the Governor, and shall, 
when required, lay the same, and all papers, minutes and 
vouchers relative thereto, before the Legislature, or either 
House thereof; and shall perform such other duties as may 
be required of him by law.

Sec. 16. A National Treasurer, and Auditor of Public

Accounts, shall be biennially elected by the joint ballot of 
both Houses of the Legislature; and in case of vacancy in 
either of said offices during the recess of the Legislature, 
such vacancy shall be filled by the Governor, which appoint
ment shall continue until the close of the next session of the 
Legislature thereof.

Sec. 17. When any office shall, from any cause, become 
vacant, and no mode is provided by the constitution and laws 
for filling such vacancy, the Governor shall have power to 
fill such vacancy by granting a commission, which shall ex
pire at the end of the next session of the Legislature, or at 
the next election by the people.

Sec. 18. The offices of Governor, National Secretary, Trea
surer, Auditor of Public Accounts, and Attorney General, 
shall be kept at the seat of Government; and the Governor, 
National Secretary, Treasurer, Auditor of Public Accounts, 
and Attorney General, shall attend at the seat of Govern
ment, quarterly, and during each session of the Legislature, 
to attend to the duties of their respective offices.

ARTICLE 6.

JUDICIAL department.

Sec. 1. The Judicial powers of this Nation shall be vest
ed in one Supreme Court, in District Courts, and in such 
County Courts as the Legislature may, from time to time, 
ordain and establish, and as may be deemed necessary and 
be directed by law.

Sec. 2. The Supreme Court shall consist of a Chief Jus
tice and two Associates, any two of whom shall form a quo
rum.

Sec. 3. The Supreme Court shall have appellate jurisdic
tion only, which shall be co-extensive with the limits of the 
Nation, under such restrictions and regulations, not repug
nant to this constitution, as may, from time to time, be pre
scribed by law : Provided, nothing in this article shall be so 
construed as to prevent the Legislature from giving the Supreme 

 Court original jurisdiction in capital cases, where the 
Judge of the District Court may he interested or preju
diced.

Sec. 4. The Supreme Court shall have power to issue such 
writs as shall be necessary to enforce its own jurisdiction; 
and also compel a Judge of the District Court to proceed to 
trial and judgment in a cause; and shall hold its session 
twice in each and every year at the seat of Government, com
mencing on the first Mondays of the months of April and 
October.

Sec. 5. The Supreme Court shall appoint its own clerk, 
who shall hold his office for four years, and be subject to re
moval by the said court for neglect of duty, misdemeanor in 
office, and such other causes as may be prescribed by law.

Sec. 6. The Legislature shall, by joint vote of both Houses, 
elect the Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts, a ma
jority of the whole number in joint vote being necessary to a 
choice. The Judges of the Supreme Court and Circuit 
Court shall be at least thirty years of age. They shall hold 
their offices during the term of four years from the date of 
their commission.

Sec. 7. The Circuit Courts shall have original jurisdic
tion over all criminal cases which shall not be otherwise pro
vided for by law, and exclusive original jurisdiction of all 
crimes amounting [to felony, and original jurisdiction of all 
civil cases which shall not be cognizable before County 
Judges, until otherwise directed by the Legislature; and 
original jurisdiction in all matters of controversy where the 
sum or amount in dispute is over fifty dollars. It shall hold 
its term in such place in each county as may be by law 
directed.

Sec. 8. Each county of this Nation shall constitute one 

judicial district until otherwise provided for by law.

Sec. 9. The Circuit Courts shall have power to issue all 
writs necessary to enforce their own jurisdiction, and have a 
superintending control and jurisdiction over County Courts, 
and of all cases of divorce, and of all suits, complaints and 

pleas whatever, without regard to any distinction between 
law and equity.

Sec. 10. There shall be a clerk of the District Courts for 
each county, who shall have their appointment from the Dis
trict Judge, and shall hold his office for two years.

Sec. 11. The Judges of the Supreme Court and District 
Courts shall receive such compensation for their services as 
may be provided for by law; and such salaries shall not be 
increased or diminished during their continuance in office.

Sec. 12. There shall be established in each county in this 
Nation a Court, to be called the County Court, which shall 
have jurisdiction in all matters in controversy in any sum 
not exceeding the value of fifty dollars.

Sec. 13. There shall be elected, by the qualified electors 
of the respective counties, a Judge of the County Court, to 
be commissioned by the Governor, and hold his office for the 
term of two years, and until his successor is elected and 
qualified. He shall, in addition to the duties that may be 
required of him by law, as a presiding Judge of the County 
Court, be a Judge of Probate Court, and have such jurisdic
tion in matters relative to the estate of deceased persons; to 
appoint guardians, granting letters testamentary and of ad
ministration ; to settle the accounts of executors and adminis
trators, and guardians; and the District Court shall have 
original and appellate jurisdiction, and general control over 
the said County Court, under such regulations as may be 
prescribed by law.

Sec. 14. In the trial of all causes in equity in the District 
Court, the plaintiff or defendant shall, upon application made 
in open court, have the right of trial by jury, to be governed 
by the rules and regulations prescribed in trials at law.

Sec. 15. No Judge shall sit in any case wherein he may be 
interested, or where either of the parties may be connected 
with him by affinity or consanguity within such degrees as 
may be prescribed by law, or where he shall have been of 
counsel in the cause. When the Supreme Court, or any two 
of its members, shall be thus disqualified to hear and determine 

 any cause or causes in said court, by reason of the 
equal division of opinion of said Judges, the same shall be 
certified to the Governor of the Nation, who shall immediately 
commission the requisite number of persons, learned in the 
law, for the trial and determination of said case or cases. 
When the Judges of the District Court are thus disqualified, 
the parties in controversy may, by consent, appoint a proper 
person to try the case ; but in case of disagreement to appoint 
a proper person by the parties, the same shall be certified to 
the Governor, to be proceeded with as in the case of Supreme 
Judges. The disqualifications of Judges of County Courts 
shall be remedied as may hereafter be by law prescribed.

Sec. 16. There shall be one District Attorney elected, by 
the qualified electors of this Nation, who shall hold his office 
for two years, and his duties, salary and perquisites shall be 
prescribed by law. He shall also act as Attorney General 
for the Nation.

Sec. 17. There shall be elected, by the qualified electors 
of each county, one sheriff, and a sufficient number of con
stables, who shall hold their offices for two years; and the 
duties, salaries and perquisites shall be prescribed by law. 
The sheriff shall not be eligible more than four years in 
every six.

Sec. 18. All Judges of the several courts of this Nation 
shall, by virtue of their offices, be conservators of the peace 
throughout the Nation. The style of all writs and process, 
shall be, “The Chickasaw Nation.” All prosecutions shall 
be carried on “in the name, and by the authority of the 
Chickasaw Nation,” and conclude “against the peace and 
dignity of the Nation.”

GENERAL PROVISIONS.

Section 1. Members of the Legislature, and all officers, 
shall take the following oath, or affirmation, before they enter

 upon the duties of their offices: “I (A. B.) do solemnly 
swear, (or affirm,) that I will faithfully and impartially dis
charge and perform all the duties incumbent on me, as----- , 
according to the best of my skill and ability, agreeably to the 
constitution and laws of the Chickasaw Nation, so help me 
God.”

Sec. 2. Treason against this Nation shall consist only in 
levying war against it, or in adhering to its enemies, giving 
them aid and comfort. And no person shall be convicted of 
treason unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same 
overt act, or his own confession in open court. And any per
son guilty of treason shall suffer death.

Sec. 3. All property, both real and personal, of the wife, 
owned and claimed by her before marriage, and that acquired 
afterwards, by gift, devise, or descent, shall be her separate 
property. And laws shall be passed more clearly defining 
the rights of the wife, in relation as well to her separate 
property, as that held in common with her husband. Laws 
shall also be passed providing for the registration of the 
wife’s separate property.

Sec. 4. Divorces from the bonds of matrimony shall not 
be granted but in cases provided for by law, by suit in the 
District Circuit Court of this Nation.

Sec. 5. The Chickasaw captains, holding office under the 
Financial Constitution of the Chickasaws, shall continue to 
hold their offices, as superintendents of the payment of the 
Chickasaw annuity, until the fourth Monday in August, 
1857.

Sec. 6. The Legislature, at its first session, shall determine 
the number of Annuity Captains, as well as to prescribe the 
mode and manner they shall be chosen, to superintend the 
payments of Chickasaw annuities.

Sec. 7. Every person shall be disqualified from holding 
any office or place of honor or profit, under the authority of 
this Nation, who shall be convicted of having given or offered 
any bribe to procure his election or appointment. Laws shall 
be made to exclude from office and from suffrage, and provide 

 for the mode and manner of punishing those who may 
hereafter be convicted of bribery, perjury, or other high 
crimes and misdemeanors.

Sec. 8. All persons, other than Chickasaws by birth, who 
have been adopted as members of the Chickasaw tribe, either 
by common consent, in council, at any time previous to the 
adoption of this constitution, or who drew land and the 
Chickasaw annuities under the treaties of 1832 and 1834, 
between the United States and the Chickasaw Nation, are 
hereby declared to be Chickasaws by adoption, and shall be 
entitled to all the rights, privileges and immunities of this 
Nation; Provided, they are citizens of either the Choctaw or 
Chickasaw Nation at the time of the adoption of this con
stitution, and have been recognized as such under the Finan
cial Council of the Chickasaws.

Seo. 9. Any person, other than a Chickasaw, having le
gally intermarried with a Chickasaw woman, shall partici
pate in the Chickasaw annuities, but shall not be eligible to 
any office of trust or profit in this Nation. In like manner, 
a wife, other than a Chickasaw woman, having legally mar
ried a Chickasaw husband, shall participate in the annuities 
of the Chickasaw tribe; Provided, they are residents of this 
Nation. This rule shall cease in cases where a husband or 
a wife, other than Chickasaws, die, or be separated from the 
bonds of matrimony. But such death or separation shall not 
affect the rights of the children (born during such inter
marriage) to participate in all the rights, privileges, and im
munities of the Chickasaws.

Sec. 10. No retrospective payments shall be made, out of 
the Chickasaw moneys, to any person herein adopted, or which 
may hereafter be adopted, under this constitution.

Sec. 11. The Legislature shall have the power, by law, to 
admit, or adopt any person to citizenship in this Nation, ex
cept a negro, or descendant of a negro: Provided, however, 
that such an admission, or adoption, shall not give a right, 
further than to settle and remain in the Nation, and to be 
subject to its laws.

Sec. 12. Whenever two-thirds of both branches of the 
Legislature deem it necessary, they may propose amend
ments to this constitution; and if two-thirds of both 
branches of the succeeding Legislature approve such amend
ments, they shall be engrafted to, and form a part of this 
constitution. 

.

Sec. 13. The Legislature shall provide for the election of 
all officers necessary to carry into effect the general and spe
cific powers of the several courts of this Nation not other
wise provided for in this constitution.

Sec. 14. All marriages which may have been either solem
nized by the laws of the Choctaw Nation, or by mutual con
sent of parties which lived together as man and wife at least 
six months previous to the adoption of this constitution, are 
hereby declared to be legalized, to all intents and purposes. 
The Legislature shall, by law, prescribe the mode and manner 
by which such marriages may be proven and recorded.
 Sec. 15. The provisions of this constitution concerning 
the term of residence necessary to enable persons to hold 
certain offices therein mentioned, shall not be held to apply 
to officers chosen at the first election by the people, or by the 
Legislature at its first session; but all Chickasaws by birth 
or adoption shall be eligible to any office at the first election 
by the people, or the Legislature at its first session, who have 
been actual settlers of the Chickasaw Nation one day next 
preceding their election.

Sec. 16. All general elections by the people, for officers 
under this constitution, shall be holden on the second 
Wednesday in the month of September, in each year. Im
mediately after the adjournment of this Convention, the 
Chief of the Chickasaw Financial Council shall appoint a 
sufficient number of judges and clerks in the several counties 
of this Nation, to cause polls to be opened in their respective 
places of holding County Courts, as established under the 
Choctaw law, on the second Wednesday in September next, 
(A. D. 1856,) for the purpose of voting for a Governor, Di
strict Attorney, electing Senators, Representatives, County

Judges, Sheriffs and Constables. The certificates of election 
of Senators, Representatives, County Judges, Sheriffs, and 
Constables, shall be given by the judges of the election in 
their respective counties. And the returns for Governor and 
District Attorney shall be sealed up and transmitted to the 
Secretary of the Financial Council, to be delivered to the 
Speaker of the House of Representatives on the first day of 
its organization, who shall open the same and count the 
votes in the presence of both Houses of the Legislature.

Sec. 17. That no inconvenience may arise from the polit
ical separation between the Choctaws and Chickasaws, it is 
hereby declared, that all the rights, privileges and immuni
ties of citizens secured under article 5th of the treaty of 
June 22d, 1855, to all Choctaws who are now or hereafter may 
become residents within the limits of the Chickasaw Nation, 
are fully recognized and protected. And all the rights of 
property acquired by virtue of the constitution and laws of 
the Choctaw Nation shall remain precisely in the same situa
tion they were before the adoption of this constitution.

Sec. 18. Full faith and credit shall be given to all the acts 
of the Chickasaw Financial Council so far as they are not 
repugnant to this constitution.

Sec. 19. The oath of office may be administered by any 

judge of this Nation.

Sec. 20. All rights and powers not herein granted or ex
pressed are reserved unto the people ; and any law that may 
be passed contrary to the provisions of this constitution shall 
be null and void.

PUBLIC EDUCATION.

A general diffusion of knowledge being essential to the 
preservation of the rights and liberties of the people, it shall 
be the duty of the Legislature of this Nation to make suitable 

 provision for the support and maintenance of Public 

Schools.

A Superintendent of Public Instruction shall be elected by 
joint vote of both Houses of the Legislature, who shall keep 
his office at the seat of government, and shall hold his office 
for the term of four years from the date of his election, 
whose duties shall be prescribed by law, and shall receive 
such compensation as the Legislature may direct.

The Legislature shall encourage by all suitable means the 
promotion of intellectual, scientific, moral and agricultural 
improvement; and such other means as shall be inviolably 
appropriated to the support of general education throughout 
this Nation.

All contracts which may have been made and entered into 
between the Board of Trustees of Public Schools and that of 
the Teachers shall be binding; subject, however, to the ap
proval or disapproval of the succeeding Legislature.

SLAVES.

Sec. 1. The Legislature of this Nation shall have no 
power to pass laws for the emancipation of slaves without 
the consent of their owners, nor without paying their owners 
previous to such emancipation a full equivalent in money for 
the slave so emancipated. They shall have the right to pass 
laws to prevent the owners of slaves to emancipate them, 
saving the rights of creditors. They shall have full power 
to pass laws which will oblige the owners of slaves to treat 
them with humanity—to provide for their necessary food 
and clothing—to abstain from all injuries to them, extending 
to life or limb: Provided, also, that laws be passed to prohibit 
the introduction into this Nation of slaves who have commit
ted high crimes in violation of the laws of other countries.

Done in Convention, at Tishomingo City, C. N., this, the 

thirtieth day of August, A. D. 1856.

JACKSON KEMP, Pres, of the Convention.
Attest : GEO. D. JAMES, Sec. of the Convention.

A. V. BROWN SecretanK

