 
 UNITED STATES  
 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 
MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW 

INDIANS


 
  
  
 RATIFIED APRIL 20, 1945 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1946 
 

 
CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE MISSISSIPPI 
BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

PREAMBLE


We, the Choctaw Indians, resident in Mississippi, desiring to estab
lish an organization for our common welfare and benefit, do hereby 
adopt and proclaim the following Constitution and By-laws.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Mississippi Band of 

Choctaw Indians.

Article II—Territory 

The jurisdiction of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall 
extend to all lands as may be now held or hereafter acquired by or for 
the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.

Article III—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 

Indians shall consist of:

(a) All Choctaw Indians of one-half (1/2) or more Indian blood, 
resident in Mississippi, January 1, 1940, as shown by the census rolls 
at the Choctaw Indian Agency, Mississippi: Provided, That the Tribal 
Council shall have the power to revise said rolls, with the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior at any time within three years from the 
date of the approval of this Constitution.

(b) Any child of one-half (1/2) or more Choctaw blood born to any 
enrolled member of the band after January 1, 1940, resident in 
Mississippi, shall be entitled to membership.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall have the power to pass ordinances, 
subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior, governing future 
membership, loss of membership, and the adoption of new members: 
Provided, That no person of less than one-half degree of Indian blood 
shall be admitted to membership in the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians.

Article IV—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians shall be a Tribal Council which shall be composed of sixteen 
(16) members, elected every two years by secret ballot, of the qualified 
voters of the following communities of the Mississippi Band: Three 
(3) members from the Bogue Chitto Community, Three (3) members 
from the Conehatta Community, Three (3) members from the Pearl 
River Community, Two (2) members from the Red Water Community, 
Two (2) members from the Standing Pine Community, Two (2) mem
 bers from the Tucker Community, and One (1) member from the 

Bogue Homo Community.

Sec. 2. Each newly elected Tribal Council at its first meeting, shall 
elect from its own membership or from the membership of the Band 
at large, (a) a Chairman, (&) a Vice-Chairman, and (c) a Secretary-

Treasurer: Provided, That any officers elected from outside the mem
bership of the Council shall not vote at meetings of the Council except 
in the case of a tie.

Article V—Elections
Section 1. Any member, male or female, twenty-one (21) years of 

age or more, shall be entitled to vote at any tribal election.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall prescribe rules and regulations 

governing tribal elections.

Sec. 3. Within thirty days after the approval of this Constitution 
and By-Laws, the temporary Tribal Council shall call and supervise 
an election in the various communities for the purpose of electing the 
members of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 4. The newly elected members of the first Tribal Council shall 
take office on the first dav of the month immediately following the 
election and shall hold office for a term of two years or until their 
successors are elected. 

Sec. 5. If any vacancy occurs in the membership of the Tribal 
Council, it shall be the duty of the Chairman of the Tribal Council to 
fill such a vacancy by appointing a member from the community from 
which such vacancy occurs, and such appointee shall hold office until 
his successor is duly elected by the voters of such community either at 
a special election or a regular election.

Sec. 6. If a vacancy occurs in the office of Chairman, Vice-Chair
man, or Secretary-Treasurer, the Tribal Council shall fill such vacancy 
at its next special or regular meeting.

'

Article VI—Community Organizations

Section 1. The members of the several communities shall have the 
right to form local community organizations and adopt their own 
rules and regulations in harmony with this Constitution. It shall be 
the duty of the Councilmen from each community to report regularly 
all the actions and decisions of the Tribal Council to the community 
organizations.

Article VII—Powers of the Tribal Council

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The Tribal Council of the Missis
sippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall have the following powers, sub
ject to any limitation imposed by the laws or the Constitution of the 
United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments:
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees 

to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in land, tribal funds, or other tribal assets;

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Mis
sissippi Band of Choctaw Indians prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To appropriate any available tribal funds for the benefit of the 

Band or any community;

(f)  To supervise and manage tribal economic affairs and enter

prises in accordance with this Constitution and By-Laws;

(g)  To pass and enforce rules and regulations which shall be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, providing for 
the management of Tribal lands, including the making and revocation 
of assignments, disposition of timber, and oil and mineral resources.

Article VIII—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and By-Laws may be proposed by 
a majority vote of the Tribal Council of the Mississippi Band of Choc
taw Indians and may be ratified and approved in the same manner as 
this Constitution and By-Laws.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the 
Council, shall perform the usual duties of a Chairman, and exercise 
any authority delegated to him by the Council. If he be a member of 
the Tribal Council, the Chairman shall have the right to vote in all 
cases; otherwise, he shall vote only in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman shall assist the Chairman when called 
upon to do so and in the absence of the Chairman he shall preside. 
When so presiding, he shall have all the rights, privileges and duties 
as well as the responsibilities of the Chairman.

Sec. 3. The Secretary-Treasurer of the Council shall conduct 
all Tribal correspondence and shall keep an accurate record of all 
matters transacted at Council meetings. It shall be his duty to submit 
promptly to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction and the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs copies of all minutes of regular and special 
meetings of the Council.

He shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all 
Tribal funds or special funds for which the Council is acting as trustee 
or custodian. He shall deposit all funds in such depository as the 
Council shall direct and shall make and preserve a faithful record of 
such funds, and shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the 
amount and nature of all funds in his possession and custody at each 
regular meeting of the Tribal Council. An audit of accounts shall be 
made once a year and at such times as the Tribal Council or the Com
missioner may require.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his possession 
or custody, except in accordance with a resolution duly passed by the 
Council.

He shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the Council and 
to the Commissioner of Indan Affairs, when sufficient funds have 
accumulated in the tribal treasury in the opinion of the Tribal Council 
or of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 4. The duties of all committees or boards, appointed by the 
Tribal Council shall be clearly defined by resolutions of the Council at 
the time of their creation or appointment. Such committees and 
boards shall report to the Council from time to time as required, and 
their activities and decisions shall be subject to review by the Council 
upon the petition of any person aggrieved thereby.

Article II—Meetings

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall hold regular meetings on the 
second Tuesday in January, April, July, and October of each year. 
Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Chairman or any 
five (5) or more members of the Council.

S53. 2. Nine (9) or more members of the Tribal Council shall 

constitute a quorum for the transactions of any tribal business.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council shall make its own rules and regula

tions for the conduct of its business.

Article III—Adoption

This Constitution and By-Laws, when adopted by a majority vote 
of the adult members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians vot
ing at a special election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in 
which at least 30 per cent of those entitled to vote, shall be submitted 
to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in 
force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved January 11, 1945, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-Laws 
was submitted for ratification to the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians residing in Mississippi, and was on April 20, 1945, duly 
adopted by a vote of 346 for and 71 against, in an election in which 
over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accord
ance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 
1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 
378). 

NicholAs Bell.
Baxter York.

A. H. McMullen,

Superintendent, Choctaw Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby ap
prove the attached Constitution and By-Laws of the Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
and By-Laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the members of the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-Laws.

Approval recommended:

William Zimmerman, Jr.

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

[seal] 

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.

Washington, D. C., May 22, 1945.
 
 

 
 
 