 
  
  
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

AND

LAWS

OF

 
 THE CHOCTAW NATION. 
 

TOGETHER WITH THE 

TREATIES 

OF 

 
 1855, 1865 and 1866.
 
 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY AND DIRECTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 JOSEPH P. FOLSOM,

Commissioned for the Purpose,
 
 

CHAHTA TAMAHA,
 
 1869.

SCHOLARLY RESOURCES, INC. 
Wilmington, Delaware • London

Reprint edition published in 1973
First published in 1869 by Wm. P. Lyon & Son, 

New York City

Library of Congress Catalog Card Number: 73-88764 
ISBN: 0-8420-1705-4

Manufactured in the United States of America
 
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION

AND

LAWS

OF

 
 THE CHOCTAW NATION.

TOGETHER "WITH THE 
 

TREATIES

OF

 
 18 55, 1865 and 186 6.
 
 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY AND DIRECTION OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

BT

 
 JOSEPH P. FOLSOM,
Commissoned for the Purpose,
 
 

CHAHTA TAMAHA, 
 
 1869.

WM. P. LYON & SON, PRINTERS AND PUBLISHERS,
NEW YORK CITY.

PREFACE.

This volume is believed to comprise all the Laws of the 
Choctaw Nation now in force. Every effort has been made 
to render it as complete as possible; yet it is probable 
that some laws may be found herein which have been re
pealed, and a few omissions may be detected. In some 
cases, the compiler has been at a loss to decide as to the 
present validity of several of the former enactments, having 
no sufficient data for his guidance; and he deemed it better 
and safer, in such cases, to give them a place in this volume, 
and leave the question of validity and force thereof to be 
decided by the proper tribunal.

The compiler has been for some time engaged in trans
lating the whole of this work into our native language. A 
perfect and faithful translation is aimed at—hence it is a 
slow work. But it is now in a good state of forwardness, 
and will be printed and published as soon as practicable— 
in all probability before the end of this year.

Choctaws have, for several years past, steadily demanded 
to have the laws of their Nation printed in one volume. 
That demand is now met; and they will, without doubt, duly 
appreciate and approve of the same. It will certainly be

found valuable for reference, and a guide, should it become 
necessary to change or revise the organic structure of our 
government, in compliance with treaty stipulations or other
wise.

The compiler may, perhaps, state in this connection that 
he has been collecting the laws ever enacted by the 
Choctaws — commencing with the earliest enactments east 
of Mississippi, and down to this time—and has succeeded 
so well as to entertain a hope of publishing them entire 
next year. It is thought that this work will show the pro
gress of cur Nation in civil government, in the time of 
nearly fifty years, more than any other work.

JOSEPH P. FOLSOM.
 
 

CONSTITUTION

OF THE

 
 CHOCTAW NATION.

We, the representatives of the people inhabiting the Choctaw 
Nation, contained within the following limits, to wit: Beginning 
at a point on the Arkansas river, one hundred paces east of old Fort 
Smith, where the western boundary line of the State of Arkansas 
crosses the said river, and running thence due south to Red River; 
thence up Red River to the point where the meridian of one 
hundred degrees west longitude crosses the same; thence north 
along said meridian to the main Canadian river; thence down 
said river to its junction with the Arkansas river; thence down 
said river to the place of beginning, except the territory bounded 
as follows, to wit: Beginning on the north bank of Red River, at 
the mouth of Island Bayou, where it empties into Red River, 
about twenty-six miles on a straight line, below the mouth of 
False Washita; thence running a northwesterly course along the 
main channel of said Bayou, to the junction of the three prongs 
of said Bayou, nearest the dividing ridge between Washita and 
Low Blue rivers, as laid down on Capt. R. L. Hunter’s map; 
thence northerly along the eastern prong of Island Bayou to its 
source; thence due north to the Canadian river; thence west 
along the main Canadian to the ninety-eighth degree of west 
longitude; thence south to Red River; and thence down Red 
River to the place of beginning; Provided, however, if the line 
running due north from the eastern source of Island Bayou, to 
the main Canadian, shall not include Allen’s or Wa-pa-nacka

Academy within the Chickasaw District; then an offset shall 
be made from said line, so as to leave said Academy two miles 
within the Chickasaw District; north, west, and south from the 
lines of boundary, said boundaries being the limits of the Chick
asaw District—assembled in Convention at the town of Doaks
ville, on Wednesday, the eleventh day of January, one thousand 
eight hundred and sixty, in pursuance of an act of the General 
Council, Approved Oct. 24, 1859, in order to secure to the citizens 
thereof the right of life, liberty and property, do ordain and es
tablish the following Constitution and form of government, and 
do mutually agree with each other to form ourselves into a free 
and independent Nation, not inconsistent with the Constitution, 
treaties and laws of the United States, by the name of the Choc
taw Nation.

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.

For the convenience and good government of the people of the 
Choctaw Nation, we do make, ordain and establish four Districts 
in this Nation, to be known by the following names and bounda
ries, viz: Mosholatubbee District, Pushamataha District, Apuck- 
shunnubbee District, and Hotubbee District.

The boundary line of Mosholatubbee District shall begin near 
old Fort Smith, where the Arkansas boundary line crosses the Ar
kansas River ; thence up said river to the Canadian Fork ; thence 
up said Canadian to where the Chickasaw District boundary strikes 
•the same, as defined by the Treaty of 1855; thence along the said 
boundary, to where it strikes the dividing ridge, between the Ca
nadian and Red Rivers ; thence easterly along said dividing ridge 
to the western boundary of the State of Arkansas; thence along 
said Arkansas line to the beginning.

The boundary of Apuckshunnubbee District shall begin on Red 
River, where the Arkansas State line strikes the same; thence 
running up said river to the mouth of Kiamichi; thence up said 
river to the mouth of Jack’s Fork; thence up said Jack’s Fork to 
the old military road; thence along said road to the boundary line 
of Mosholatubbee District, on the top of the dividing ridge, be
tween the Arkansas and Red Rivers; thence easterly along said

boundary to the western boundary line of the State of Arkansas ; 
thence along the said State line to the beginning.

The boundary of Pushamataha District shall begin on Red 
River, at the mouth of Kiamichi; thence running up said Red 
River to the mouth of Island Bayou, to where the eastern bounda
ry line of the Chickasaw District strikes said river, as defined by 
the Treaty of 1855 ; thence along said boundary line to the divid
ing ridge between the Canadian and Red Rivers; thence easterly 
along said ridge to the line of Mosholatubbee District, on the top 
of the dividing ridge, to where the District line of Apuckshun
nubbee District intersects Mosholatubbee District; thence south
erly along said line to the beginning.

The boundaries of Hotubbee District shall be embraced within 
the limits of the ninety-eighth and one hundredth degree of west 
longitude, and between Red River and Canadian river, known as 
the “Lease Land.”

ARTICLE I.

Declaration of Rights.—That the general, great and essential 
principles of liberty and free government may be recognized and 
established, we declare:

Sec. 1.—That all free men, when they form a social compact, 
are equal in rights, and that no man or set of men are entitled to 
exclusive, separate public emolument or privileges from the com
munity, but in consideration of public services.

Sec. 2.—That all political power is inherent in the people, and 
all free government are founded on their authority and established 
for their benefit, and therefore they have at all times an inaliena
ble and indefeasible right to alter, reform, or abolish their form 
of government in such manner as they may think proper or ex
pedient.

Sec. 3.—There shall be no establishment of religion by law. 
No preference shall ever be given by law to any religious sects, 
society, denomination or mode of worship. And no religious test 
shall ever be allowed as a qualification to any public trust under 
this government.

Seo. 4.—No human authority ought in any case whatever to

control of interfere with the rights of conscience in matters of 
religion.

Sec. 5.—No person shall for the same offence be twice put in 
jeopardy of life or limb, nor shall any person’s property be taken 
or applied to public use without the consent of the General Coun
cil, and without just compensation being first made therefor.

Sec. 6.—No person shall ever be appointed or elected to any 
office in this nation for life or during good behaviour, but the 
tenure of all offices shall be for some limited period of time, if the 
person appointed or elected thereto so long behave well.

Sec. 7.—The right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate.
Sec. 8.—Every citizen has a right to bear arms in defence of 

himself and his country.

Sec. 9.—That the printing-press shall be free to every person, 
and no law shall ever be made to restrain the rights thereof. 
The free communication of opinion is one of the inviolable rights 
of man, and every citizen may freely speak, write, and print on 
any subject, being responsible for abuse of that liberty.

Sec. 10.—That the people shall be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers and possessions from unreasonable seizures and 
searches, and that no warrant to search any place or to seize any 
person or thing shall issue, without describing the place to be 
searched and the person or thing to be seized as nearly as may 
be, nor. without probable cause supported by oath or affirmation. 
But in all cases where suspicion rests on any person or persons of 
conveying or secreting whisky or other- intoxicating liquors, the 
same shall be liable to search or seizure as may be hereafter pro
vided by law.

Sec. 11.—That no free man shall be taken, or imprisoned, or 
disseized of his freehold liberties or privileges, or outlawed, or 
exiled, or in any manner destroyed or deprived of his life, liberty, 
and property, but by the judgment of his peers or the law of the 
land.

Sec. 12.—No person shall ever be imprisoned for debt.
Sec. 13.—That excessive bail shall not be required, nor exces

sive fines imposed, nor cruel or unusual punishments inflicted.

Seo. 14. —That all courts shall be open, and every person for an

injury done him in his lands, goods, person or reputation, shall 
have remedy by due course of law, and right and justice adminis
tered without sale, denial or delay.

Sec. 15.—That the citizens have a right in a peaceable manner, 
to assemble together for their common good, to instruct their 
representatives, and apply to those invested with the powers of 
the government for redress of grievances, or other proper pur
poses, by petition, address or remonstrance.

Sec. 16.—That no power of suspending laws shall be exercised 

except by the General Council or its authority.

Sec. 17.—That in all criminal prosecutions, the accused hath a 
right to be heard by himself or counsel, or both, to demand the 
nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted by the wit
nesses against him, to have a compulsory process for obtaining 
witnesses in his favor ; and in all prosecutions by indictment or 
information, a speedy and public trial by an impartial jury of the 
county or district where the offence was committed ; that he can
not be compelled to give evidence against himself, nor can he be 
deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but by due course of 
law.

Sec. 18.—That all prisoners shall, before conviction, be bailable 
by sufficient securities, except for capital offences, where the 
proof is evident or the presumption great, and the privilege of the 
writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when in case 
of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

Sec. 19.—That the General Council shall have power to pass 
general laws in regard to the collection of fines, bonds, forfeitures, 
and court fees, and direct the manner of such collection.

Sec. 20.—No property qualification for eligibility to office, or 
for the right of suffrage, shall ever be required by law in this 
Nation.

Sec. 21.—No conviction for any offence shall work corruption 
of blood and forfeiture of estate. The General Council shall pass 
no bill of attainder, retrospective law, nor law impairing the obli
gation of contracts.

ARTICLE II.

Distribution of Power.

Sec. 1.—The powers of government of the Choctaw Nation shall 
be divided into three distinct departments, and each of them con
fined to a separate body of magistracy, to wit: Those which are 
legislative to one, those which are executive to another, and those 
which are judicial to another.

Sec. 2.—No person, or collection of persons, being of one of 
those departments, shall exercise any power properly belonging 
to either of the others, except in the instances hereafter expressly 
directed or permitted by the General Council.

ARTICLE III.

Legislative Department.

Sec. 1.—The legislative power of this Nation shall be vested in 
a General Council which shall consist of a Senate and House of 
Representatives, and the style of their laws shall be, “Be it en
acted by the General Council of the Choctaw Nation assembled.”
Sec. 2.—The Senate of the Choctaw Nation shall be composed 
of four Senators from each district, chosen by the qualified elec
tors thereof, for the term of two years.

Sec. 3.—No person shall be a Senator who shall not have 
attained the age of thirty years and been one year a citizen of 
this Nation, and who shall not, when elected, be an inhabitant of 
that District at least six months preceding his election for which 
he shall be chosen.

Sec. 4.—The House of Representatives shall be composed of 
members chosen every year by the qualified electors in the sev
eral counties of each district, at the ratio of one representative to 
every one thousand citizens; nevertheless when there is a frac
tional number of five hundred or more citizens in any county, 
they shall be entitled to one additional representative; but when 
the population of any one of the counties shall not reach the ratio 
of one thousand, they shall still be allowed one representative.

Sec. 5.—In case of death, resignation, or inability of any of the 
senators or representatives, the Principal Chief shall have the 
power to make temporary appointments and fill vacancies that 
may occur in any of the counties.

Sec. 6.—No person shall be a representative, unless he be a citi
zen of this Nation, and shall have been an inhabitant thereof six. 
months next preceding his election, and the last month thereof a. 
resident of the county for which he shall be chosen, and shall have 
attained the age of twenty-one years.

Sec. 7.—The House of Representatives, when assembled, shall 
choose a Speaker and its other officers, and the Senate shall choose 
a President and its officers, and each shall judge of the qualifica
tions and elections of its own members, but a contested election, 
shall be determined in such manner as shall be directed by law. 
A majority of each house shall constitute a quorum to do business, 
but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and. may 
compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and 
under such penalties as each house may provide.

Sec. 8.—Every bill which shall have passed both houses of the 
legislature shall be presented to the Principal Chief; if he ap
prove, he shall sign it, but if not he shall return it, with his ob
jections; to the house in which it shall have originated, who shall 
enter the objections at large upon the journal and proceed to re
consider it; if, after such re-consideration, two-thirds of the 
members present shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent with 
the objections to the other house, by which it shall likewise be re
considered ; if approved by two-thirds of the members present of 
that house it shall become a law, but in such case the vote of 
both houses shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names- 
of the members voting for and against the bill be entered on the 
journals of each house respectively; if any bill shall not be re
turned by the Principal Chief within three days (Sundays ex
cepted) after it shall have been presented to him, the same shall 
become a law in like manner as if he had signed it. Every bill 
presented to the Principal Chief one day previous to the adjourn
ment of the legislature, and not returned to the house in which 
it originated before its adjournment, shall become a law, and

have the same force and effect as if signed by the Principal 
Chief.

Sec. 9.—Each house may determine the rules of its own pro
ceedings, punish members for disorderly behavior, and with the 
consent of two-thirds, expel a member, but not a second time for 
the same cause.

Sec. 10.—Each house shall keep a journal of its proceedings 
and publish the same, and the yeas and nays of the members of 
either House, on any question, shall at the desire of any three 
members present, be entered on the journal.

Sec. 11.—Each house may punish by imprisonment, during the 
session, any person not a member, for disrespectful or disorderly 
behavior in its presence, or for obstructing any of its proceed
ings, provided such imprisonment shall not at any one time ex
ceed forty-eight hours.

Sec. 12.—Neither house shall, without the consent of the other, 
adjourn for more than three days,- nor to any other place than that 
in which they may be sitting.

Sec. 13.—Each member of the General Council shall receive 
from the public treasury a compensation for his services, which 
may be increased or diminished by law ; but no increase of com
pensation shall take effect during the session at which such in
crease shall have been made.

Sec. 14.—No person who hath heretofore been, or hereafter may 
be a collector or holder of public moneys, shall have a seat in 
either house of the General Council, until such person shall have 
accounted for, and paid into the treasury, all sums for which he 
may be accountable.

Sec. 15.—The first election for Senators and Representatives 
shall be general throughout the Nation, and shall be held on the 
first Wednesday in August, 1860, and thereafter there shall be 
biennial elections for Senators.

Sec. 16.—Senators and Representatives shall, in all cases, ex
cept of treason, felony, or breach of the peace, be privileged from 
arrest during the session of the General Council, and in going to 
and returning from the same.

ARTICLE IV.

Judicial Department.

Sec. 1.—The judicial power of this Nation shall be vested in 

one Supreme Court, in Circuit and County Courts.

Sec. 2.—Until Hotubbee District shall be duly organized, and 
officers elected therein under this Constitution, the Supreme Court 
shall be composed of three Supreme Judges, one to be chosen 
from Apuckshunubbee District, one from Pushamataha District, 
and one from Mosholatubbee District, one of whom shall be styled, 
Chief Justice, and two of whom shall constitute a quorum to do 
business.

Sec. 3.—The Supreme Court shall have no jurisdiction but such 

as properly belongs to a court of errors and appeals.

Sec. 4.—The Supreme Judges shall have power to issue writs 
and other process necessary to the exercise of their appellate juris
diction, and shall have original jurisdiction only in such cases as 
may hereafter be provided by law, and shall be conservators of 
the peace throughout the Nation.

Sec. 5.—The Circuit Courts shall be composed of one Circuit 
Judge in each District, and shall have original jurisdiction in all 
criminal cases which shall not be otherwise provided for by law, 
and exclusive original jurisdiction of all crimes amounting to 
felony, and original jurisdiction of all civil cases which shall not 
be cognizable before the Judges of the county, until otherwise 
directed by law, and original jurisdiction in all matters of con
tracts, and in all matters of controversy where the same is over 
fifty dollars. It shall hold its term at such times and places in 
each district as are now specified by law or may hereafter be pro
vided.

Sec. 6.—The Circuit Courts shall exercise a superintending 
control over the County. Courts, and shall have power to issue all 
necessary writs and process to carry into effect their general and 
specific powers under such regulations and restrictions as may be 
provided by law.

Sec. 7.—The Circuit Judge in each District shall be elected by

the qualified voters of their respective Districts, and the General 
Council by a joint vote of both houses shall elect the Supreme 
Judges. Any person receiving the highest number of votes cast 
shall be elected.

Sec. 8.—The Judges of the Supreme Court shall be at least 
thirty years of age, and the Circuit Judge of the Circuit Courts 
shall be at least twenty-five years of age before they shall be eli
gible to hold the office, and when elected they shall serve for the 
term of four years from the date of their commission ; they shall 
appoint their own clerks under such provisions as the law may 
prescribe. 

Sec. 9.—The Judges of the Supreme Court and Circuit Courts 
shall at stated times receive such compensation for their services, 
which shall not be increased or diminished during the term for 
which they are elected, as may be determined by law. They shall 
not be allowed any fees or perquisites of office.

Sec. 10.—There shall be a court established in each county of 
this Nation, to be called County Courts, which shall have jurisdic
tion in all matters relative to disbursement of money for county 
purpose, and in every other case that may be necessary to the 
internal improvements and local concerns of their respective 
counties.

Sec. 11.—The Judges of the County Courts shall in no case 
have jurisdiction to try and determine any criminal case or penal 
offence against this Nation, but may sit as examining courts, and 
commit, discharge, or recognize to the court having jurisdiction 
for further trial of all offences against the peace and dignity of 
this Nation; for the foregoing purposes, they shall have power 
to issue all necessary writs and process, to bind any person to 
keep the peace, or to give security for his good behavior.

Sec. 12.—The county Judges shall be elected by the qualified 
electors of their respective counties, and shall be commissioned 
by the Principal Chief, and shall hold their office for the term 
of two years.

Sec. 13.—No Judge shall preside on the trial of any cause in the 
event of which he may be interested, or' where either of the 
parties shall be connected to him by affinity or consanguinity

within such degrees as may be prescribed by law, or in which he 
may have been of council, or have presided in any Circuit or 
County Courts, except by consent of all the parties. In case any 
or all of the Judges of the Supreme Court shall be thus disqualified 
from presiding on any cause, or causes, the Court or Judges thereof 
shall certify the same to the Principal Chief of the Nation, who 
shall immediately commission the requisite number of men learned 
in the law for the trial and determination thereof. But in case 
such disqualification should take place in any of the Circuit or 
County Judges, the Circuit or County Judge shall have the power 
to appoint a substitute for that particular case for which he may 
be disqualified.

Sec. 14.—Judges shall not charge juries with regard to matter 

of fact, but may state the testimony and declare the law.

Sec. 15.—There shall be a prosecuting Attorney elected in each 
District by the qualified electors of their respective District whose 
compensation and term of service shall be prescribed by law.

Sec. 16.—The General Council shall have power by law to 
prescribe the manner of holding and determining suits in the Cir
cuit and County Courts and the manner of granting appeals.

Sec. 11.—The County Judges in addition to their respective 
duties that may be required of them by law, shall be Judges of 
the Courts of Probate and have such jurisdiction in matters rela
tive to the estate of deceased persons, executors, administrators 
and guardians as may be prescribed by law, until otherwise 
directed by the General Council.

Sec. 18.—Writs and other process shall run in the name of the 
Choctaw Nation, and bear test and be signed by the Clerks of their 
respective Courts from which they issue, and all indictments shall 
conclude against the peace and dignity of the Choctaw Nation.

Sec. 19.—The General Council shall provide by law for deter

mining contested elections of County Judges.

Sec. 20.—The Supreme Court shall be held twice in each year 

at the Seat of Government of the Choctaw Nation.

Sec. 21.—The County Judges shall appoint their own Clerks 

who shall act as Treasurer of the County.

ARTICLE V.

Executive Department.

Sec. 1. The supreme executive power of the Choctaw Nation 
shall be vested in one Principal Chief, assisted by three subordi
nate District Chiefs, who shall hold their respective offices for the 
term of two years from the time of their installation. But they 
shall not be eligible for the same office for more than two terms in 
succession.

Sec. 2.—The Principal Chief of the Choctaw Nation shall be 
elected by the qualified electors of the Choctaw Nation, and the 
subordinate Chiefs of the Choctaw Nation shall be elected by the 
qualified electors of their respective Districts on the first Wednes
day in August, Eighteen Hundred and Sixty, and every two years 
thereafter.

Sec. 3.—The returns of every election for Principal Chief shall 
be made out, sealed up and transmitted to the Supreme Judges of 
each District, to be forwarded by him to the National Secretary 
who shall deliver them to the Speaker of the House of Represen
tatives during the first week of its organization, who shall pro
ceed to open and count the votes in the presence of both houses of 
the General Council, and the person having the highest number of 
votes shall be declared Principal Chief by the Speaker. But if two 
or more shall be equal or highest in votes, then one of them shall 
be chosen Principal Chief by the joint ballot of both houses of the 
General Council; but the returns of every election for District 
and County Officers shall be made out, sealed and transmitted to 
the Supreme Judge of each District who shall proceed to open, 
take an abstract, and declare what candidates for District and 
County Officers are elected, and forward a true copy of the same 
to the National Secretary who shall file them in his office for safe 
keeping.

Sec. 4.—In case of death, resignation or removal of the Prin
cipal Chief, the President of the Senate shall exercise the duties of 
Principal Chief, until the next regular election for that office; but 
should the vacancy be on account of the inability of the Principal

Chief to discharge his duties, the President of the Senate shall 
exercise the said duties until such inability shall be removed.

gEC 5.—In case of any vacancy occurring in the office of Dis
trict Chiefs, the Principal Chief shall have the power to appoint a 
Chief pro. tem. in the District where such vacancy may occur until 
the next regular election for that office.

Sec. 6.—No person shall be eligible to the office of Principal or 
District Chief unless he shall have attained the age of thirty years, 
and have been an inhabitant of the Choctaw Nation at least five 
years next preceding his election.

Sec. 7.—The Principal Chief shall from time to time give to the 
General Council information of the state of the Government, and 
recommend to their consideration such measures as he may deem 
expedient.

Sec. 8.—The Principal Chief shall take carb that the laws be 

faithfully executed.

Sec. 9.—The Principal Chief may, by proclamation, on extraor
dinary occasions convene the General Council at the Seat of Gov
ernment, or at a different place if that have become since their 
last adjournment, dangerous from an enemy or from contagious 
disease.

Sec. 10.—In case of disagreement between the two houses with 
respect to the time of adjournment, the Principal Chief may adjourn 
them to such a time as he shall think best, not beyond the day of 
the next meeting of the General Council.

Sec. 11.—All vacancies which may occur in office that are 
elective by the People or General Council, the Principal Chief 
shall have the power to fill such vacancies by appointment until 
the next regular election.

Sec. 12.—No person shall hold the office of Principal or District 
Chief, and any other office or commission, either in this Nation, or 
under any State, or in the United States or any power, at one and 
the same time.

Sec. 13.—The District Chiefs shall have such superintending 
control over the affairs of their respective districts as may be pre
scribed by the General Council. It shall be their duty to have the 
laws properly enforced within their respective limits. They shall

from time to time report to the Principal Chief such information 
respecting the affairs of their Districts, and recommend for his con
sideration such measures as they may deem expedient.

Sec. 14.—A Sheriff and Ranger shall be elected in each County 
by the qualified electors thereof, who shall hold their office for the 
term of two years unless sooner removed. And it shall be the 
duty of the District Chiefs to appoint a competent number of light 
horsemen in their respective Districts as may hereafter be provided 
by law, who shall hold their offices for the term of two years 
unless sooner removed.

Sec. 15.—The Principal Chief, National Secretary, National 
Treasurer, National Auditor, and National Attorney, shall reside 
at or near the seat of government.

Sec. 16.—The Principal Chief shall be head-commander of the 

militia of this Nation.

ARTICLE VI.

Impeachments.

Sec. 1.—The House of Representatives shall have the sole power 

of impeaching.

Sec. 2.—All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. When 
sitting for that purpose, the Senators shall be on oath or affirma
tion. No person shall be convicted without the concurrence of 
two-thirds of the members present.

Sec. 3.—The chiefs and all civil officers shall be liable to im
peachment for any misdemeanor in office, but judgment in such 
case shall not extend further than removal from office and dis
qualification to hold any office of honor, trust or profit under this 
Nation, but the party convicted shall nevertheless be liable, and 
subject to indictment, trial, and punishment according to law as 
in other cases.

ARTICLE VII.

General Provisions.

Sec. 1.—Until Hotubbee District shall be duly organized, the 
Principal Chief of the Choctaw Nation shall exercise such authority

 over the citizens of this Nation, living in that District, as 
he may deem expedient for the protection of person, life, and 
property.

Sec. 2.—No person shall be Principal Chief, or Subordinate 
Chief, Senator, or Representative, unless he be a free male citizen 
of the Choctaw Nation, and a lineal descendant of the Choc
taw or Chickasaw race.

Sec. 3.—The General Council shall have the power to deter
mine what county or counties shall be entitled to elect one or 
more Senators in the several Districts of this Nation.

Sec. 4.—Members of the General Council and other officers, 
both executive and judicial, before they enter upon the duties of 
their respective offices shall take the following oath or affirmation, 
to wit: I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be,) that 
I will support the Constitution of the Choctaw Nation, and that I 
will faithfully and impartially discharge, to the best of my abilities, 
the duties of the office of--------------  according to law. So help
me God.

Sec. 5.—The General Council shall have the power to deter
mine the compensation of the Principal Chief, District Chiefs, and 
other officers of the Nation, which compensation shall not be in
creased or diminished for the term of years they are elected or ap
pointed.

Sec. 6.—The General Council shall have power by law to specify 
the manner in which offenders against the laws of this Nation, 
who may escape into the United States, or into any Indian Na
tion, or from one district into another in this Nation, shall be de
manded, apprehended, and arraigned for trial in the several courts 
of this Nation, having original jurisdiction thereof.

Sec. 7.—Every free male citizen of this Nation who shall have 
attained to the age of eighteen years, and who shall have been a 
citizen of this Nation six months, shall be deemed a qualified elec
tor, and shall be entitled to vote in the county or district where 
he may have actually resided at least one month preceding the 
election for each and every office made elective in this Nation.

Sec. 8.—All general elections shall be by ballot; and the elec
tors in all cases, except in cases of treason, felony, and breach of

the peace, shall be privileged from arrest during their attendance 
at elections and on going to and returning therefrom.

Sec. 9.—The General Council shall have the power by law to 
establish one or more precincts in each county in the several dis
tricts of this Nation, and prescribe the mode and manner of hold
ing and conducting elections.

Sec. 10.—The oath of office may be administered by any of the 
Judges of this Nation until the General Council shall otherwise 
direct.

Sec. 11.—The General Council shall have the power to pass 
such laws and measures as they shall deem expedient for the 
general good of the Choctaw people, provided no law be passed 
or adopted contrary to the provisions of this Constitution.

Sec. 12.—The mode of declaring war in this Nation shall be by 
at least two-thirds of the members of the General Council in full 
Council, with the approval of the Principal Chief, unless in case of 
actual invasion by an enemy, in which case the people shall have 
the right to defend themselves until the Council is convened by 
proclamation of the Principal Chief, and measures of defence pre
scribed.

Sec. 13.—The Principal Chief shall have the power, by and with 
the advice and consent of the Senate, to appoint Commissioners, 
or Delegates, to transact such business as may become expedient 
to the Choctaw Nation, and all other officers whose appointments 
are not herein or otherwise provided for.

Sec. 14.—The General Council of the Choctaw Nation shall have 
the power to pass such laws as they may deem expedient to 
punish rebellion, treason and other high crimes against the Nation.
Sec. 15—All contested elections for Principal Chief and other 

officers shall be determined as the law may prescribe.

Sec. 16.—The General Council shall have the power to create 
by law such regulations and commissions, and appoint Superin
tendents and such other officers, as the case may be, required for 
the promotion and advancement of all the schools in this Nation.

Sec. 11.—Eighteen thousand dollars of the interest money arising 
from the Chickasaw fund, granted to the Choctaws by convention 
held and concluded at Doaksville, shall be set apart annually for 

educational purposes, and the remaining seven thousand dollars 
shall be set apart, annually, to be expended as the law may here
after direct.

Sec. 18.—Any citizen of this Nation who may find any mine or 
mines, or mineral waters, shall have exclusive right and privilege 
to work the same, so long as he may choose, within one mile in 
any direction from his works or improvements; provided, however, 
he does not interfere with the rights of the former settler.

Sec. 19.—No person who denies the being of a God, or a future 
state of rewards and punishments, shall hold any office in the 
Civil Department of this Nation, nor shall be allowed his oath in 
any Court of Justice.

Sec. 20.—The Treasurer of this Nation, together with all other 
persons who may be intrusted with public money shall be required 
to give such bond and security as may be prescribed by law.

Sec. 21.—No laws of a general nature, unless otherwise pro
vided for, shall be enforced until sixty days after the passage 
thereof.

Sec. 22.—No money shall be drawn from the Treasury but in 
consequence of an appropriation made by law; an accurate state
ment of the receipts and expenditures of public moneys shall be 
attached to and published with the laws, at every regular session 
of the General Council.

Sec. 23.—That all the provisions in the Constitution, now in 
existence, and not revised or adopted by this Constitution, are 
hereby declared null and void ; and that any law which may be 
passed contrary to the provisions herein specified shall be null 
and void; and all rights and powers not herein granted or 
expressed shall be reserved unto the people.

Sec. 24.—Divorces from the bond of matrimony shall not be 

granted but in cases provided for by law.
 
 

ARTICLE VIIL

 
 Militia.

Sec. 1.—The General Council shall provide by law for organizing 
and disciplining the militia of this Nation, in such manner as they

shall deem expedient, not incompatible with the Constitution, 
Treaties and. Laws of the United States, in relation thereto.

Sec. 2—Officers of the Militia shall be elected or appointed in 
such manner as the General Council shall from time to time direct, 
and shall be commissioned by the Principal Chief.

Sec. 3.—The Principal Chief shall have power to call forth the 
militia to execute the laws of the Nation, to suppress insurrections 
and repel invasions.

ARTICLE IX.

Mode of Amending and Revising the Constitution.

Sec. 1.—Whenever a majority of the members of the General 
Council assembled shall deem it necessary, they may propose an 
amendment or amendments to this Constitution; which amendment 
shall be submitted by the National Secretary, at least four months 
preceding the next regular election, at which the qualified voters 
shall vote directly for and against such proposed amendment, or 
amendments ; and if it shall appear that a majority of the quali
fied voters shall have voted in favor of such amendment or amend
ments, then the same may be incorporated as a part of this Con
stitution at the next succeeding General Council.

Sec. 2.—And if at any time two-thirds of the Senate and the 
House of Representatives shall think it necessary to revise and 
change this entire Constitution, they shall recommend to the 
electors, at the next election for members of the General Council, 
to vote for or against the Convention, and it shall appear that a 
majority of the electors voting at such election, have voted in 
favor of ealling a Convention, the General Council shall, at its next 
session, provide by law for calling a Convention, to be holden 
within six months after the passage of such law; and such Conven
tion shall consist of Delegates equal to the number of members in 
the House of Representatives of the General Council.

SCHEDULE.

Sec. 1.—All matters now pending in the several courts of this 
Nation, shall be transferred to such courts as may have proper 
jurisdiction thereof under this Constitution.

Sec. 2.—All rights, prosecutions, claims on contracts, as well of 
individuals as bodies corporate, and laws now in force at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution, and not inconsistent there
with, until altered or repealed by the General Council, shall re
main in full force.

Sec. 3.—Any special appointments or contracts heretofore made 
and approved under existing laws or resolutions of the General 
Council, shall be approved by the Principal Chief of this Nation, 
and the appointees commissioned, and contracts so made ratified 
by him.

Sec. 4.—In order that no inconvenience may result to the pub
lic service, from the taking effect of this Constitution, no office 
shall be suspended, nor any laws relative to the duties thereof be 
changed or abrogated, until the officers elected and appointed un
der this Constitution shall be duly qualified and enter upon their 
respective duties.

Sec. 5.—Immediately after the governor of this Nation shall 
make proclamation that this Constitution is ratified by the people, 
then it shall be the duty of the President of this Convention to 
give notice forthwith to all the Probate Judges in this Nation, 
directing them to hold an election on the first Wednesday in 
August, A. D. 1860, for a Principal Chief and all other officers, 
district and county, provided for in this Constitution, to be con
ducted in the manner prescribed by the existing election laws; 
should there be any vacancy, however, in the office of Probate 
Judge, then it shall be the duty of any of the county officers to 
order the said elections.

Sec. 6.—The returns for the elections above directed shall be 
sent sealed to the President of this Convention, who shall open 
and publish the same, giving certificates to those whom the re
turns show to be chosen for the various officers ; the returns for 
Principal Chief shall be transmitted as the. Constitution directs.

Sec. 7.—The President of this Convention shall call to his as
sistance two or more competent persons to aid him in making out 
the returns of the said elections.

Sec. 8.—In the event the President of this Convention should 
die, then the returns of the elections for Principal Chief and other

officers, shall be transmitted to the National Secretary, who shall 
proceed as in manner above directed.

Sec. 9.—Until apportionment shall be made by law, in pursu
ance of this Constitution, for the election of Senators,- the counties 
of three Districts, singly and severally, shall elect a Senator or 
Senators for members to the General Council as follows:

In Apukshanubbee District.

In Pushamataha District.

In Mosholatubbee District.

Sec. 10.—The first election for members to the House of 
Representatives, under this Constitution, shall consist of a number

 of members equal to the apportionment under the existing 

laws.

W. A. Dibkell, Clerk.
 
  
 

GEORGE HUDSON,

 
 President of the Convention.

Delegates of the Convention : 
 

FORBIS LEFLORE, 

 
  
  
 L. P. PITCHLYNN, 
ELLIS W. FOLSOM, 
WM. McCOY,  
 
JOSEPH DUKES, 
 
 WM. S. PATTON,  
 
EDMOND GARDNER, 

 
  
  
 JOSEPH P. FOLSOM, 
JOHN PICKEN (his + mark)  
 
STEPHEN HOLSON, 
 
 S. P. WILLIS,  
 
ALFRED SHONG, 
PLINY FISK, 
SIMON CONKLIL, 
PISTAMBEE, 

 
  
  
 PETER WATSON (his + mark),  
 
DANIEL MILLER, 
ADAM NAIL, 
 
 DAVIS KING. 
 

AMENDMENTS TO THE CONSTITUTION

OF THE


CHOCTAW NATION.

Sec. 1.—The National Secretary, National Treasurer, National 
Auditor, and National Attorney shall be elected by the qualified 
electors of this Nation, who shall hold their offices for the term of 
two years and until their successors are elected' and qualified, un
less sooner removed ; and they shall perform such duties as may 
be prescribed by law.

Sec. 2.—The seat of government shall be permanently fixed at 
Armstrong Academy, and shall be called and known as Chahta 
Tamaha, and the first and all future sessions of the General Coun
cil shall commence on the first Monday of October, 1863, and 
each and every year thereafter, and shall be held at the Chahta 
Tamaha aforesaid.
 
 

TREATY

BETWEEN

THE UNITED STATES

AND THE

 
 CHOCTAW AND CHICKASAW INDIANS.

Articles of agreement and convention between the United 
States and the Choctaw and Chickasaw tribes of Indians, made 
and concluded at the city of Washington, the twenty-second day 
of June, A. D. one thousand eight hundred and fifty-five, by 
George W. Manypenny, commissioner on the part of the United 
States; Peter P. Pitchlynn, Israel Fulsom, Samuel Garland, and 
Dixon W. Lewis, commissioners on the part of the Choctaws ; and 
Edmund Pickens and Sampson Folsom, commissioners on the part 
of the Chickasaws.

Whereas, the political connection heretofore existing between 
the Choctaw and the Chickasaw tribes of Indians, has given rise 
to unhappy and injurious dissensions and controversies among 
them, which render necessary a re-adjustment of their relations to 
each other and to the United States : and whereas, the United 
States desire that the Choctaw Indians shall relinquish all claim 
to any territory west of the one hundredth degree of west longi
tude, and, also, to make provision for the permanent settlement 
within the Choctaw country, of the Wichita and certain other 
tribes or bands of Indians, for which purpose the Choctaws and 
Chickasaws are willing to lease, on reasonable terms, to the

