 
  
 CONSTITUTION OF THE CHOCTAW NATION

January 5, 1857 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the representatives of the people inhabiting the Choctaw Nation, contained with the 
following limits, to wit: Beginning at a point on the Arkansas river, one hundred paces 
east of old Fort Smith, where the western boundary line of the State of Arkansas crosses 
the said river, and running hence due south to Red River; thence up Red River to the 
point where the meridian of one hundred degrees west longitude crosses the same; thence 
north along said meridian to the main Canadian river; thence down said river to its 
junction with the Arkansas river; thence down said river to the place of beginning, 
Except the territory bounded as follows, to wit: beginning on the north bank of Red 
River, at the mouth of Island Bayou, where it empties into Red River, about twenty - six 
miles on a straight line, below the mouth of False Washita; thence running a 
Northwesterly course along the main channel of said Bayou, to the junction of the three 
prongs of said Bayou, nearest the dividing ridge between Washita and Low Blue rivers, 
as laid down on Capt. R.L. Hunter’s map; thence northerly along the eastern prong of 
Island Bayou to its source; thence due north to the Canadian river; thence west along the 
main Canadian to the ninety-eight degree of west longitude; thence south to Red River; 
and thence down red River to the beginning; Provided, however, if the line running due 
north from the eastern source of Island Bayou, to the main Canadian, shall not include 
Allen’s or Wa-pa-nocha Academy within the Chickasaw district, then an offset shall be 
made from said line so as to leave said Academy two miles within the Chickasaw 
district, north, west and south from the lines of boundary; said boundaries being the limits 
of the Chickasaw Nation, assembled in convention at the town of Skullyville, on 
Monday, the fifth day of January, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-seven, in 
pursuance of an act of the General Council for that purpose, approved November the 
seventh, one thousand eight hundred and fifty-six; in order to secure to the citizens 
thereof the rights of life, liberty and property, do ordain and establish the following 
Constitution and form of government, and do mutually agree with each other to form 
ourselves into a free and independent Nation, not inconsistent with the constitution, 
treaties and laws of the United States, by the name of the Choctaw Nation.
 
 

ARTICLE I

DECLARATION OF RIGHTS

 
 That the general, great and essential principles of liberty and free government may be 
recognized and established, we declare:

SECTION 1. That all free men, when they form a social compact, are equal in rights, and 
that no man or set of men are entitled to exclusive, separate public emolument or 
privileges from the community, but in consideration of public services.

SECTION 2. That all political power is inherent in the people, and all free governments 
are founded on their authority and established for their benefit, and therefore, they have at 
all times an inalienable and indefeasible right to alter or establish their form of 
government in such a manner as they may think expedient.

SECTION 3. There shall be no establishment of religion by law. No preference shall 
ever be given by law to any religious sects, society, denomination or mode of worship. 
And no religions test shall ever be allowed as a qualification to any public trust under this 
government.

SECTION 4. That the printing press shall be free to every person, and no law shall ever 
be made to restrain the rights thereof. That free communication of opinion is one of the 
inviolable rights of man and every citizen may freely speak, write and print on any 
subject, being responsible for abuse of that liberty.

SECTION 5. That the people shall be secure in their persons, houses, papers and 
possessions from unreasonable seizures and searches, and that no warrant to search any 
place, or to seize any person or thing shall, issue without describing the place to be 
searched, and the person or thing to be seized as nearly as may be nor without probable 
cause supported by oath or affirmation. But in all cases where suspicion rests on any 
person, or persons, of conveying or secreting whiskey, or other intoxicating liquors, the 
same shall be liable to search or seizure as may be hereafter provided by law.

SECTION 6. That in all criminal prosecutions the accused hath a right to be heard by 
himself or counsel, or both, to demand the nature and cause of the accusation to be 
confronted by the witnesses against him, to have a compulsory process for obtaining 
witnesses in his favor; and in all prosecutions by indictment or information, a speedy and 
public trial by an impartial jury of the county where the offence was committed, that he 
cannot be compelled to give evidence against himself, nor can he be deprived of his life, 
liberty, or property, but by due course of law.

SECTION 7. No person shall be accused, arrested or detained; except in cases as 
ascertained by law, and according to the form which the same has prescribed; and no 
person shall be punished but in virtue of a law established and promulgated prior to the 
offence and legally applied.

SECTION 8. No person shall for the same offence be twice put in jeopardy of life or 
limb; nor shall any person’s property be taken or applied to public use without the 
consent of the General Council, and without just compensation being first made 
therefore.

SECTION 9. That all courts shall be open and every person for an injury done him in his 
lands, goods, person or reputation, shall have remedy by due course of law, and right and 
justice administered without sale, denial or delay.

SECTION 10. That no power of suspending laws shall be exercised, except by the 
General Council or its authority.

SECTION 11. That excessive bail shall not be required, nor excessive fines imposed, nor 
cruel punishments inflicted.

SECTION 12. That all prisoners shall, before conviction, be bail able by sufficient 
securities, except for capital offences, where the proof is evident or the presumption 
great, and the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall not be suspended, unless when 
in case of rebellion or invasion, the public safety may require it.

SECTION 13. That the General Council shall have power to pass general laws in regard 
to the collection of debts, fines, bonds, forfeitures, and court fees, and direct the manner 
of such collection.

SECTION 14. No conviction for any offence shall work corruption of blood and 
forfeiture of estate. The General Council shall pass no bill of attainder, retrospective law, 
nor law impairing the obligation of contracts.

SECTION 15. No property qualification for eligibility to office, or for the right of 
suffrage, shall ever be required by law in this nation.

SECTION 16. That the citizens have a right in a peaceable manner, to assemble together 
for the common good, and to apply to those invested with the powers of the government 
for redress of grievances, or other proper purposes, by petition, address or remonstrance.

SECTION 17. Every citizen has a right to bear arms in defense of himself and of this 
nation.

SECTION 18. No standing army shall be kept up without the consent of the General 
Council; and the military shall in all cases, and at all times be in strict subordination to 
the civil power.

SECTION 19. That no hereditary emoluments, privileges, or honors shall ever be 
granted or conferred in the Nation.

SECTION 20. The right of trial by jury shall remain inviolate.

SECTION 21. No person shall be debarred from prosecuting or defending any civil 
cause for or against him or herself before any tribunal in this nation by him or herself, or 
counsel, or both.

SECTION 22. No person shall ever be appointed or elected to any office in this Nation 
for life, or during good behavior; but the tenure of all offices shall be for some limited 
period of time, if the person or appointed or elected thereto so long behave well.

CONCLUSION.

To guard against transgressions of the high powers herein delegated: WE DECLARE, 
that every thing in this article is excepted out of the general powers of government, and 
shall forever remain inviolate; and that all laws contrary thereto, or to the following 
provisions, shall be void.

ARTICLE II.
 
 

DISTRIBUTION OF POWER

 
 SECTION 1. The powers of government of the Choctaw Nation shall be divided into 
three district departments and each of them confined to a separate body of magistracy, to 
wit: Those which are legislative to one, those which are judicial to another, and those 
which are executive to another.

SECTION 2. No person or collection of papers being of one of those departments, shall 
exercise any power properly belonging to either of the others, except in instances 
hereafter expressly directed or permitted.

ARTICLE III.
 
 

LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. Every free male citizen of this Nation who shall have attained the age of 
twenty-one years, and who shall have been a citizen of this Nation six months, shall be 
deemed a qualified elector, and be entitled to vote in the county where he may actually 
reside, at least one month preceding the election for each and every office made elective 
in this Nation.

SECTION 2. Electors shall in all cases, excepting those of treason, felony or breach of 
the peace, be privileged from arrest during their attendance on elections and going to and 
returning from the same.

SECTION 3. The legislative power of this Nation shall be vested in two distinct 
branches, the one to be styled “the Senate,” the other “the House of Representatives,” and 
both together, “the General Council of the Choctaw Nation,” and the style of their laws 
shall be: “Be it enacted by the General Council of the Choctaw Nation.”

SECTION 4. The members of the House of Representatives shall be chosen by the 
qualified electors, and shall serve for the term of two years from the day of the general 
election and no longer.

SECTION 5. All elections by the people shall be by ballot and shall be regulated by law.

SECTION 6. The representatives shall be chosen every two years on the first Wednesday 
in August.

SECTION 7. No person shall be a Representative unless he be a citizen of this Nation 
and shall have been an inhabitant thereof six months next preceding his election, and the 
last month thereof a resident of the county for which he shall be chosen, and shall have 
attained to the age of twenty-one years.

SECTION 8. Elections for representatives for the several counties shall be held at the 
places of holding their respective courts, or in the several election districts into which the 
county may be divided. That when there are two or more counties adjoining, which have 
residuum’s over and above the ratio then fixed by law, if such residuum’s, when added 
together, will amount to such ratio, in that case one representative shall be added to that 
county having the largest residuum.

SECTION 9. The General Council shall, at their first session and at periods of not less 
than every four nor more than every eight years cause an enumeration to be made of all 
free inhabitants of this Nation, and the whole number of representatives shall, at the 
several periods of making such enumeration, be fixed by the Council and apportioned 
among the several counties, according to the number of free inhabitants in each, and shall 
not be less than seventeen nor more than thirty-five: Provided, however, that each county 
shall always be entitled to at least one representative.

SECTION 10. The whole number of Senators shall at the periods of making the 
enumeration before mentioned, be fixed by the General Council, and apportioned among 
the several districts to be established by law, according to the number of free inhabitants 
in each, and shall never be less than one-third nor more than one-half of the whole 
number of representatives.

SECTION 11. The senators shall be chosen by the qualified electors for four years, and 
on their being convened in consequence of the first election; they shall be divided by lot 
from their respective districts into classes as near equal as can be. And the seats of the 
senators of the first class shall be vacated at the expiration of the second year.

SECTION 12. Such mode of classifying new additional senators shall be observed as 
will, as nearly as possible, preserved an equality of members in each class.

SECTION 13. When a senatorial district shall be composed of two or more counties, it 
shall not be entirely separated by any county belonging to another district, and no county 
shall be divided in forming a district.

SECTION 14. No person shall be a Senator unless he be a citizen of this Nation and 
shall have been an inhabitant thereof for two years next preceding his election, and the 
last year thereof a resident of the district for which he shall be chosen, and have attained 
to the age of thirty years.

SECTION 15. The House of Representatives, when assembled, shall choose a speaker 
and its other officers, and the Senate shall choose a president and its officers, and each 
shall judge of the qualifications and elections of its members, but a contested election 
shall be determined in such manner as shall be directed by law. A majority of each 
House shall constitute a quorum to do business, but a smaller number may adjourn from 
day to day, and may compel the attendance of absent members in such manner and under 
such penalties time for the same cause.

SECTION 16. Each house may determine the rules of its own proceedings, punish 
members for disorderly behavior, and with the consent of two-thirds, expel a member, but 
not a second time for the same cause.

SECTION 17. Each house may keep a journal of its proceedings and publish the same, 
and the yeas and nays of the members of either house, on any question, shall at the desire 
of any three members present, be entered on the journal.

SECTION 18. When vacancies happen in either house, the Governor, or the persons 
exercising the powers of the Governor, shall issue writs of election to fill such vacancies.

SECTION 19. Senators and Representatives shall, in all cases except for treason, felony, 
or breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during the session of the General 
Council, and in going to and returning from the same, allowing one day for every twenty 
miles such member may reside from the place at which the General Council is convened.

SECTION 20. Each house may punish by imprisonment, during the session, any person 
not a member, for disrespectful or disorderly behavior in its presence, or for obstructing 
any of its proceedings, provided such imprisonment shall not at any one time, exceed 
forty-eight hours.

SECTION 21. The doors of each house shall be opened, except on such occasions of 
great emergency as, in the opinion of the house may require secrecy.

SECTION 22. Neither house shall, without the consent of the other, adjourn for more 
than three days, nor to any other place than that in which they may be sitting.

SECTION 23. Bills may originate in either House, and be amended, altered or rejected 
by the other; but no bill shall have the force of a law until, on three several days, it be 
read in each house, and free discussion be allowed thereon, unless four-fifths of the house 
in which the bill shall be pending may deem it expedient to dispense with this rule; and 
every bill having passed both houses, shall be signed by the speaker and the president of 
their respective houses.

SECTION 24. All the bills for raising revenue shall originate in the House of 
Representatives; but the Senate may amend or reject them as other bills.

SECTION 25. Each member of the General Council shall receive from the public 
treasury a compensation for his services, which may be increased or diminished by law; 
but no increase of compensation shall take effect during the session at which such 
increase shall have been made.

SECTION 26. No Senator or Representative shall, during the term for which he shall 
have been elected, nor for one year thereafter, be appointed to any civil office of profit 
under this nation, which shall have been created, or the emoluments of which shall have 
been increased, during such term; except such offices as may be filled by elections by the 
people, and no member of either house of the General Council, after his election, and 
during the remainder of the term for which he is elected, be eligible to any office or 
place, the appointment to which may be made in whole or in part by either branch of the 
General Council.

SECTION 27. No person holding a lucrative office under this Nation shall be eligible to 
the General Council.

SECTION 28. No person who hath heretofore been, or hereafter may be a collector or 
holder of public moneys, shall have a seat in either house of the General Council, until 
such person shall have accounted for, and paid into the treasury, all sums for which he 
may be accountable.

SECTION 29. The first election for Senators and Representatives shall be general 
through out the Nation, and shall be held on the first Wednesday in August 1857, and 
thereafter there shall be biennial elections for Senators to fill the places of those term of 
service may have expired.

SECTION 30. The first and all future sessions of the General Council shall be held in the 
town of Boggy Depot, until the Seat of Government shall be fixed by the General Council 
elsewhere. The sessions of the General Council shall commence on the first Monday in 
October each and every year, and shall be held annually, until biennial sessions shall be 
directed by law.

SECTION 31. The Governor, National Secretary, National Treasurer, National Auditor 
and National Attorney, shall reside at or near the Seat of Government.

ARTICLE IV.
 
 

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. The judicial power of this Nation shall be vested in one Supreme Court, in 
Circuit Courts and Courts of Probate.

SECTION 2. The Supreme Court shall consist of the judges of the Circuit Courts, a 
majority of whom shall constitute a quorum. The General Council shall divide the 
Nation into convenient circuits, and the qualified electors of each circuit shall elect one of 
said judges for the term of four years.

SECTION 3. The Supreme Court shall have no jurisdiction but such as properly belongs 
to a court of errors and appeals.

SECTION 4. The counties at present comprising Mooshulitubbee District, shall compose 
the first judicial circuit, the counties comprising Apukshunbee district shall compose the 
second judicial circuit, and the counties comprising Pushamataha District, to which shall 
be added the country lying between the ninety-eight and the one hundredth degree of 
west longitude, shall compose the third judicial circuit. The General Council may change 
their circuits, and add to their number when deemed expedient; Provided, such change do 
not take effect during the first term of office of the judge.

SECTION 5. All vacancies that may occur in said court, from death, resignation, or 
removal, shall be filled by election, as aforesaid: Provided, however, that if the unexpired 
term does not exceed one year, the vacancy shall be filled by executive appointment.

SECTION 6. No person shall be eligible to the office of Judge of the Supreme and 
Circuit Court, who shall not have attained, at the time of his election the age of thirty 
year.

SECTION 7. The Supreme Court shall be held twice in each year, at the seat of 
Government of the Nation.

SECTION 8. No judge shall sit on the trial of any cause when the parties or either of 
them, shall be connected by affinity or consanguinity, or when he may be interested in 
the same, except by consent of the judge and of the parties; and whenever a quorum of 
said court are situated as aforesaid, the Governor of the Nation shall, in such case, 
specially commission two or more men, of law knowledge, for the determination thereof.

SECTION 9. The judges of said courts shall receive for their services a compensation to 
be fixed [by] law—which shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.

SECTION 10. The Circuit Court shall have original jurisdiction in all matter civil and 
criminal, within this Nation, but in civil cases only when the principal of the sum in 
controversy exceeds fifty dollars.

SECTION 11. A Circuit Court shall be held in each county of this Nation at least twice 
in each year; and the judges of said courts shall interchange circuits with each other in 
such; manner as may be prescribed by law.

SECTION 12. The General Council shall give to the Circuit Court of each county equity 
jurisdiction, when the public good requires it; also in all cases of divorce and for the 
foreclosure of mortgages.

SECTION 13. The style of all process shall be “The Choctaw Nation,” and all 
prosecutions shall be carried on in the name and by the authority of the “The Choctaw 
Nation,” and shall conclude “against the peace and dignity of the same.”

SECTION 14. A court of Probate shall be established in each county of this Nation, with 
jurisdiction in all matters testamentary and of administration in orphan’s business, and 
the allotment of dower in cases of idiocy and lunacy, and of persons “non compos 
mentis.” The judges of said court shall be elected by the qualified electors of the 
respective counties, for the term of two years.

SECTION 15. The clerk of the Supreme Court shall be appointed by said court, for the 
term of four years; and the clerks of the Circuit and Probate courts shall be elected by the 
qualified electors of the respective counties, and shall hold their offices for the term of 
two years.

SECTION 16. A competent number of Justices of the Peace and Constables shall be 
chosen in each county by the qualified electors thereof, by who shall hold their offices for 
the term of two years. The jurisdiction of Justices of the Peace shall be limited to causes 
in which the principal of the amount in controversy shall not exceed fifty dollars. In all 
causes tried by a justice of the Peace, the right of appeal shall be secured under such rules 
and regulations as shall be prescribed by law.

SECTION 17. Said Justices of the Peace shall constitute a Board of Police for each 
county; a majority of whom may transact business—which body shall have full 
jurisdiction over roads, highways, ferries and bridges, and all other matters of county 
police; and shall order all county elections to fill vacancies that may occur in the office of 
their respective counties. The Judge of the Court of Probate shall be the President of the 
board of police, and the clerk of the court of Probate shall be the clerk of the same.

SECTION 18. The judges of all the courts of this Nation, also the Justices of the Peace 
shall, in virtue of these offices, be conservators of the peace, and shall be, by law, vested 
with ample powers in this respect.

SECTION 19. There shall be a National Attorney elected by the qualified electors of the 
Nation; and a competent number of district attorneys shall be elected by the qualified 
electors of their respective districts, whose compensations and term of service shall be 
prescribed by law.

SECTION 20. The General Council shall provide by law for determining contested 
elections of Judges of the Supreme and Circuit Courts, of the Probate courts, and other 
offices.

SECTION 21. The judges of the several courts of this Nation, for willful neglect of duty 
or other reasonable causes, shall be removed by the Governor on the address of two- 
thirds of both houses of the General council; the address to be by joint vote of both 
houses. The cause or causes for which such removal shall be required shall be stated at 
length in such address and on the journal of each house. The judge so intended to be 
removed shall be notified and admitted to a hearing in his own defense, before any vote 
on such address shall pass. The vote, on such address shall be taken by yeas and nays, 
and entered on the journal of each house.

SECTION 22. Judges of the Probate, clerks, sheriffs, and other county officers for 
willful neglect of duty, or misdemeanor in office, shall be liable to trial by jury, and upon 
conviction shall be removed from office.

ARTICLE V.
 
 

EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. The chief executive power of the Choctaw Nation shall be vested in a 
Governor, who shall hold his office for two years from the time of his installation.

SECTION 2. Governor shall be elected by the qualified electors of this Nation. The 
returns of every election for Governor shall be sealed up and transmitted to the National 
Secretary, who shall deliver them to the Speaker of the House of Representatives at the 
next ensuing session of the General Council; during the first week of which session the 
said speaker shall open and publish them in the presence of both houses of the General 
Council. The person having the highest number of votes shall be Governor; but if two or 
more shall be equal, or highest in votes, then one of them shall be chosen Governor by 
the joint ballot of both houses of the General Council . Contested elections for Governor 
shall be determined by both houses of the General Council in such manner as shall be 
prescribed by law.

SECTION 3. The Governor shall be at least thirty years of age, a free and acknowledged 
citizen of the Choctaw Nation—shall have resided in the Nation at least five years next 
preceding the day of election, and shall not be capable of holding the office more than 
four years in any term of six years.

SECTION 4. He shall at stated periods receive a compensation for his services, which 
shall not be increased or diminished during the term for which he shall have been elected.

SECTION 5. He shall be the commander-in-chief of the militia and other forces of the 
Nation.

SECTION 6. He may on extraordinary occasions, convene the General Council at the 
seat of Government, or at a different place, if that shall have become since their 
adjournment dangerous from an enemy or from disease, and in case of disagreement 
between the two houses, with respect to adjournment, he may adjourn them to such a 
time as he shall think proper, not beyond the day of the next stated meeting of the 
General Council.

SECTION 7. He shall from time to time give to the General Council information of the 
state of the Government and recommend to their consideration such measures, as he shall 
deem expedient.

SECTION 8. He shall take care that the laws be faithfully executed.

SECTION 9. In all criminal and penal cases, except in those of treason and 
impeachment, he shall have power to grant reprieves and pardons, and remit fines, and in 
cases of forfeiture to stay the collection until the end of the next session of the General 
Council, and to remit forfeitures, by and with the advice and consent of the Senate. In 
case of treason he shall have power to grant reprieves, by and with the advice and consent 
of the Senate; but may respite the sentence until the end of the next session of the General 
Council.

SECTION 10. All commissions shall be in the name and by the authority of the Choctaw 
Nation, be sealed with the great seal, and signed by the Governor, and be attested by the 
National Secretary.

SECTION 11. There shall be a seal of this Nation, which shall be kept by the Governor, 
and used by him officially, and shall be called the great seal of the Choctaw Nation.

SECTION 12. All vacancies not provided for in this constitution shall be filled in such 
manner as the General Council may prescribe.

SECTION 13. The General Council shall have power, by law, to determine the 
compensation of the Governor, and National Secretary.

SECTION 14. No person shall hold the offices of Governor, and any other office or 
commission, either in this Nation, or under any State, or in the United States, or under 
any other power at one and the same time.

SECTION 15. The National Secretary shall be elected by the qualified electors of the 
Nation, and continue in office during the term of two years. He shall keep a fair register 
of all the official acts and proceedings of the Governor, and shall, when required, lay the 
same, and all papers, minutes and vouchers relative thereto, before the General Council, 
and shall perform such other duties as may be required of him by law.

SECTION 16. Every bill which shall have passed both houses of the General Council 
shall be presented to the Governor; if he approve, he shall sign it, but if not he shall return 
it, with his objections, to the house in which it shall have originated, which shall enter the 
objections at large upon their journals, and proceed to consider it; if, after such 
reconsideration, two-thirds of the house shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be sent with 
the objections to the other house, by which it shall likewise be reconsidered; if approved 
by two-thirds of that house it shall become a law, but in such case the vote of both houses 
shall be determined by yeas and nays, and the names of the members voting for and 
against the bill be entered on the journals of each house respectively; if any bill shall not 
be returned by the Governor within four days (Sunday excepted) after it shall have been 
presented to him, the same shall become a law in like manner as if he signed it, unless the 
General Council, by their adjournment, prevent its return, in which case it shall not 
become law.

SECTION 17. Every order, resolution or vote, to which the concurrence of both houses 
may be necessary, except resolutions for the purpose of obtaining the joint action of both 
houses, and on questions of adjournment, shall be presented to the Governor, and before 
it shall take effect be approved by him, or being disapproved, shall be repassed by both 
houses, according to the rules and limitations prescribed in case of a bill.

SECTION 18. Whenever the office of Governor shall become vacant by death, 
resignation, removal from office or otherwise, the President of the Senate shall exercise 
the office of Governor until another Governor shall be duly qualified, and in case of the 
death, resignation, removal from office, or other disqualification of the President of the 
Senate so exercising the office of Governor, the Speaker of the House of representatives 
shall exercise the office, until the President of the Senate shall have been chosen, and 
when the office of Governor, President of the Senate and Speaker of the House, shall 
become vacant in the recess of the senate, the person acting as National Secretary, for the 
time being, shall, by proclamation, convene the Senate, that a President may be chosen to 
exercise the office of Governor; said National Secretary exercising the office of Governor 
until the Senate convene and choose a President.

SECTION 19. When either the President or Speaker of the House of Representatives 
shall so exercise said office, he shall receive the compensation of Governor only, and his 
duties as President or Speaker shall be suspended, and the Senate or House 
Representatives, as the case may be, shall fill the vacancy until his duties, as Governor 
shall cease.

SECTION 20. A National Treasurer and National Auditor shall be elected by the 
qualified electors of the Nation and hold their offices for the term of two years unless 
sooner removed.

SECTION 21. A Sheriff, a Coroner, a Treasurer, and Ranger, shall be elected in each 
county, by the qualified electors thereof, who shall hold their offices for two years unless 
sooner removed.
 
 

MILITIA

 
 SECTION 1. The General Council shall provided by law, for organizing and disciplining 
the militia of this nation, in such manner as they shall deem expedient, not incompatible 
with the constitution and laws of the United States, in relation thereto.

SECTION 2. Commissioned officers of the Militia (staff officers and the officers of 
voluntary companies excepted) shall be elected by the persons liable to perform military 
duty and the qualified electors within their respective commands and shall be 
commissioned by the Governor.

SECTION 3. The Governor shall have the power to call forth the militia to execute the 
laws of the Nation and to suppress insurrection.

ARTICLE VI.
 
 

IMPEACHMENTS

 
 SECTION 1. The House of Representatives shall have the sole power of impeaching.

SECTION 2. All impeachments shall be tried by the Senate. When sitting for that 
purpose, the Senators shall be on oath or affirmation. No person shall be convicted 
without the concurrence of two-thirds of the members present.

SECTION 3. The Governor and all civil officers shall be liable to impeachment for any 
misdemeanor in office; but judgment in such cases shall not extend further than removal 
from office and disqualification to hold any office of honor, trust or profit, under this 
Nation; but the party convicted, shall, nevertheless, be liable and subject to indictment, 
trial, and punishment according to law, as in other cases.

ARTICLE VII.
 
 

GENERAL PROVISIONS

 
 SECTION 1. Members of the General Council and officers, executive and judicial, 
before they enter upon the duties of their respective offices shall take the following oath 
or affirmation, to-wit: “I do solemnly swear (or affirm, as the case may be) that I will 
support the Constitution of the Choctaw Nation, so long as I continue a citizen thereof; 
and that I will faithfully discharge to the best of my abilities, the duties of the office of 
________, according to law. So help me God.”

SECTION 2. Treason against the Nation shall consist only in levying war against it, or in 
adhering to its enemies, giving them aid and comfort. No person shall be convicted of 
treason, unless on the testimony of two witnesses to the same overt act, or his own 
confession in open court.

SECTION 3. Every person shall be disqualified from holding an office or place of honor 
or profit under the authority of this Nation, who shall be convicted of having given or 
offered any bribe to procure his election. Laws shall be made to exclude from office and 
from suffrage those who shall hereafter be convicted of bribing, perjury, forgery, or other 
high crimes or misdemeanors. The privilege of free suffrage shall be supported by laws 
regulating elections and prohibiting under adequate penalties, all undue influence therein, 
from power, bribery, tumult or other improper conduct.

SECTION 4. No person who denies the being of a God, or a future state of rewards and 
punishments, shall hold any office in the civil department of this Nation, nor be allowed 
to testify on oath in any court of justice.

SECTION 5. No laws of a general nature, unless otherwise provided for, shall be 
enforced, until sixty days after the passage thereof.

SECTION 6. No money shall be drawn from the treasury but in consequence of an 
appropriation made by law. No money from the Treasury shall be appropriated to objects 
of internal improvement, unless a bill for that purpose shall be approved by two-thirds of 
both branched of the General Council; and a regular statement and account of the receipts 
and expenditures of public monies shall be published annually.

SECTION 7. No law shall be passed to raise a loan or money upon the credit of this 
Nation, or to pledge the faith of the Nation for the payment or redemption of any loan or 
debt, unless such law be proposed in the Senate or House of Representatives, and be 
agreed to by a majority of the members of each House, and entered on their journals, with 
the yeas and nays taken thereon, and be referred to the next succeeding General Council 
and published throughout the Nation, for three months previous to the next regular 
election; and unless a majority of each branch of the General council, so elected, after 
such publicity, shall agree to, and pass such law; and in such case the yeas and nays shall 
be taken and entered on the journals of each House.

SECTION 8. The General Council shall direct by law, in what manner, and in what 
courts, suits may be brought against the Nation.

SECTION 9. Religion, morality, and knowledge, being necessary to good government, 
the preservation of liberty, and the happiness of mankind, schools and the means of 
education, shall forever be encouraged in this Nation.

SECTION 10. Divorces from the bonds of matrimony shall be granted, but in cases 
provided for by law.

SECTION 11. Returns of elections shall be made to the National Secretary, in such 
manner as may be prescribed by law.

SECTION 12. New counties may be established by the General Council, so that the 
territory thereof shall not be separated by any other county already formed.
 
 

SLAVES

 
 SECTION 1. The General Council shall have no power to pass laws for the emancipation 
of slaves, without the consent of their owners, unless where the slave shall have rendered 
to the Nation some distinguished service in which case the owner shall be paid a full 
equivalent for the slave so emancipated. They shall have no power to prevent emigrants 
to this Nation from bringing with them such persons as are deemed slaves by the laws of 
any one of the United States, so long as any person of the same age or description shall 
be continued in slavery by the laws of this Nation; Provided, that such person or slave be 
the bona fide property of such emigrants; And provided also, that laws may be passed to 
prohibit the introduction into this Nation, of slaves who may have committed high crimes 
in any of the United States. They shall have power to pass laws to permit the owners of 
slaves to emancipate them, saving the rights of creditors, and preventing them from 
becoming a public charge. They shall have full power to oblige the owners of slaves to 
treat them with humanity to provide for them necessary clothing and provisions, to 
abstain from all injuries to them extending to life or limb, and in case of their neglect or 
refusal to comply with the direction of such laws, to have such slave or slaves sold for the 
benefit of the owner or owners.

SECTION 2. The General Council shall have, and are hereby vested with, power to pass 
such laws, regulating or prohibiting the introduction of slaves into the Nation, as may be 
deemed proper and expedient.

SECTION 3. In the prosecution of slaves for crimes of which the punishment is not 
capitol, summary proceedings shall be had as may be regulated by law.

MODE OF REVISING THE CONSTITUTION.

Whenever two thirds of each branch of the General Council shall deem any change, 
alternation or amendment necessary to this Constitution such proposed change, alteration 
or amendment, shall be read and passed by a majority of two-thirds of each House 
respectively on each day, for three several days public notice thereof shall then be given 
to the National Secretary at least six months preceding the next General election, at 
which the qualified electors shall vote directly for or against such change, alteration, or 
amendment. And if it shall appear that a majority of the qualified voters voting for 
members of the General Council, shall have voted for the proposed change, alteration, or 
amendment, then it shall be inserted by the next succeeding General Council, as a part of 
this Constitution, and not otherwise.
 
 

SCHEDULE

 
 SECTION 1. All matters now pending in the several Courts of this Nation may be 
transferred in such courts, as may have proper jurisdiction thereof, under this 
constitution.

SECTION 2. The Chiefs and all officers now holding office, under the authority of the 
Nation, shall continue to hold and exercise their respective offices, until they shall be 
superseded pursuant to the provisions of this Constitution, and until their successors be 
duly qualified.

SECTION 3. All laws now in force in this Nation, not repugnant to this Constitution, 
shall continue to operate until they shall expire by their own limitation, or be altered or 
repealed by the General Council.

SECTION 4. After the adoption of this Constitution, and three months before the day of 
holding the election, the President of this Convention shall give written notice to the 
Judge of the county court of each county in the Nation, directing an election to be held on 
the first Wednesday in August next, for a Governor and all other officers, national and 
county, provided for in this Constitution, which election shall be conducted in the manner 
prescribed by the existing election laws; and as the enumeration required by the 
Constitution, for the apportionment of members of the General Council, will be 
impracticable, before the first assemblage of that body the same number of members of 
both branches now allowed by law, shall continue for the first two years.

SECTION 5. The returns for the elections above directed, shall be sent sealed, to the 
President of this convention, who shall open and publish the same, giving certificates to 
those whom the returns show to be chosen for the various officers. The returns for 
Governor shall be transmitted as the constitution directs.

SECTION 6. Any special appointments or contracts made by the Chiefs, under existing 
laws, shall be approved by the Governor of the Nation, and the appointees commissioned, 
and contracts so made, ratified by him.

SKYLLYVILLE, C.N., January 1857
 
 

TANDY WALKER,

 
 President of the Convention.

S. S. Fisher}

Wm. B. Pitchlynn} Clerks.

S. P. Willis,}

DELEGATES OF THE CONVENTION.

Robt. Kincaid, L. D. Garland

E. W. Folsom, Bushpo Tuppah,

Kennedy McCurtain, Coleman Cole, 

Mishamah Tubbee, Swinney Frazier, 

McKee King, Alfred Wade, 

Jas. Thompson, Wm. Roebuck, 

John page, J. E. Dwight, 

Jas. Garland, Daniel Folsom, 

Mitchell LeFlore, Jacob Folsom, 

Wm. James, John McIntosh, 

John Lewis, Fransua Battiest, 

Wm. Cass.

