 
  
 MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYIAWS

 
 7945

As Approved by die Commissioner of Indians Affairs March 28,1975, 
As Amended and approved, March 8, 2013
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS
 
 1975 Amendment............................................................................. i

2006 Amendment........................................................................... iv

2013 Amendment........................................................................... ix
 
 

REVISED CONSTITUTION
OF THE MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

 
 PREAMBLE.................................................................................... 1

ARTICLE I  - NAME......................................................................... 1

ARTICLE II  - JURISDICTION............................................................1

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP...........................................................1

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY...................................................1

ARTICLE V-ELECTIONS.................................................................3

ARTICLE VI  - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE.............. 4

ARTICLE VII  - COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS.............................. 5

ARTICLE VIII  - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL.... 5

ARTICLE IX - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF.......................7

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS OF INDIANS...................................................8

ARTICLE XI  - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM................................ 9

ARTICLE XII  - REPEAL AND SAVING CLAUSE................................. 9

ARTICLE XIII  - AMENDMENTS.....................................................10
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE
MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

 
 ARTICLE I  - DUTIES OF TRIBAL COUNCIL OFFICERS.....................11

ARTICLE II  - MEETINGS...............................................................11

ARTICLE III  - ADOPTION.............................................................12
 
 

REVISED CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Choctaw Indians, members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 
desiring to promote the achievement of self-government for the Choctaw people do, 
for our welfare and benefit, hereby adopt and proclaim the following constitution and 
bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians and 
may hereinafter be referred to as “the tribe.”
 
 

ARTICLE II - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall extend to all lands 
now held or which may hereafter be acquired by or for or which may be used under 
proper authority by the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, and to all persons 
who are now or may hereafter become members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Sec. 1. The membership of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall consist 
of:

(a)  All Choctaw Indians of one-half (1/2) or more Choctaw blood, 

resident in Mississippi, January 1, 1940, as shown by the census roll 
maintained by the Bureau of Indian Affairs at the Choctaw Agency, 
provided that the tribal council shall have the power to revise said 
rolls, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior at any time.

(b)  Any child of one-half (1/2) or more Choctaw blood bom to any en
rolled member of the band after January 1, 1940, shall be entitled to 
membership.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall have the power to pass ordinances, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, governing future membership, loss of 
membership, and the adoption of new members; provided that no person of less than 
one-half degree of Choctaw blood shall be admitted to membership in the Missis
sippi Band of Choctaw Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Sec. 1. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall be governed by a tribal 
council and a tribal chief whose powers are enumerated in Articles VIII and IX 
herein.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall consist of elected representatives from the eight (8) 
recognized Choctaw communities. Each community shall be entitled to 
representation on the tribal council according to population as is hereinafter 
provided:

Bogue Chitto Community 
Conehatta Community 
Pearl River Community 
Red Water Community 
Standing Pine Community 
Tucker Community 
Bogue Homa Community 
Crystal Ridge Community 

3
3
3
2
2
2
1
1

Sec. 3. The tribal chief shall be elected by the Choctaw people at large with each 
registered voter entitled to one vote.

Sec. 4. The tribal council shall have authority to make changes in the number of 
representatives from each community according to future community needs, 
community population changes or applicable Federal law, subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 5. Any enrolled member of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians may 
become a candidate for Tribal Council to be filled by tribal election who:

Is at least 21 years of age at the time of election;

(a) 
(b)  Has not been convicted of, pled nolo contendere to, any felony 

offense occurring at any time in any jurisdiction, unless such felony 
conviction has been pardoned;

(c)  Has a minimum of a High School diploma or a GED of a twelfth 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

grade equivalency;
Is a resident of the Choctaw community which he or she desires to 
represent for at least six (6) months prior to the date of election;
Is registered to vote in the Choctaw community which he or she 
desires to represent;
Secures endorsement signatures by at least 10 persons registered to 
vote in tribal elections in the community from which he or she intends 
to run for office. (This requirement shall not apply to the Bogue Homa 
Community and Crystal Ridge Community where three signatures will 
be required.)

Sec. 6. Any enrolled member of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians may 
become a candidate for Chief who:

Is at least 30 years of age by the time of the election;

(a) 
(b)  Has not been convicted of, or pled nolo contendere to, any felony 

offense occurring at any time in any jurisdiction, unless such felony 
conviction has been pardoned;

(c)  Has a minimum of a High School diploma or a GED of a twelfth 

grade equivalency;
Is a community resident registered to vote in a community;

(d) 

(e) 

Secure the endorsement signatures of at least 51 registered voters, at 
least nine each from Pearl River, Bogue Chitto, and Conehatta, at least 
six each from Tucker, Red Water, and Standing Pine, and at least 3 
from Bogue Homa and Crystal Ridge.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Sec. 1. Any member of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, whether male or 
female, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more and registered according to rules 
set forth by the tribal council, shall be entitled to vote in any tribal election.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall prescribe rules and regulations to govern the 
conduct of tribal elections consistent with this constitution and bylaws. All elections 
shall be by secret ballot.

Sec. 3. The first regular election under this revised constitution and bylaws shall 
take place in June 1975. Subsequent thereto, regular elections shall be held in June 
of odd-numbered years. The present tribal council representatives shall remain in 
office until their successors are duly elected and seated.

Sec. 4. In all tribal council elections, the person receiving the largest number of 
votes for a given position shall be declared elected.

Sec. 5. For the election of the tribal chief, the person receiving a majority of the total 
votes cast for all candidates shall be declared the tribal chief. In the event that no 
person receives a majority of the total votes cast, the two candidates receiving the 
highest number of votes shall be paired in a run-off election. This run-off election 
shall be held within thirty (30) days of the initial election. Of these two candidates, 
the one who receives a majority of the total votes cast in the run-off election shall be 
declared the tribal chief.

Sec. 6. The term of office for members of the tribal council shall be four (4) years 
and until their successors are duly elected and seated, consistent with Sec. 7 below.

Sec. 7. In the regular tribal council election of June, 1975, eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms and eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for two (2) year terms, to wit:

Bogue Chitto Community
Conehatta Community
Pearl River Community
Red Water Community
Standing Pine Community
Tucker Community
Bogue Homa Community

4 Year Terms
1
1
1
2
1
1
1

2 Year Terms
2
2
2
0
1
1
0

For the June, 1975, tribal election, the candidate receiving the most votes in each 
community will be elected to serve for a 4-year term, with the other candidate(s) be
ing elected to serve 2-year term. This provision does not apply to the Red Water and 
Bogue Homa Communities.

Beginning with the regular tribal council election of June, 1977, and continuing 
thereafter, all council representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms.

Upon approval of this paragraph by the Secretary of the Interior, a special 
election shall be held for the elected representative from the Crystal Ridge 
Community. Thereafter, regular elections for the Crystal Ridge representative shall 
be held in election years in which there is not a regular election for the election of 
tribal chief.

Sec. 8. Newly elected members of the tribal council shall take office at the first 
regular meeting of the council following their election.

Sec. 9. The term of office for the tribal chief shall be four (4) years and until a 
successor has been elected and seated.

Sec. 10. At the first regular meeting following each election, the tribal council shall 
elect, from among the membership of the council, a vice-chief and a secretary
treasurer with such powers and duties as are hereinafter enumerated. These officials 
shall serve for 2 years or until their successors are elected and seated.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Sec. 1. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the tribal council and less than 
one (1) year remains of the term of the member who has vacated his position, the 
tribal chief shall appoint a successor to such member, who shall serve until his 
successor is duly elected and seated at the next regular election. The appointee 
shall claim residence in and represent the same community as did the member who 
vacated his position.

Sec. 2. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the tribal council and more than 
one (1) year remains of the term of the member who has vacated his position, the 
tribal chief shall, within sixty (60) days, cause to be held a special election in the 
community entitled to representation for the purpose of filling the vacancy.

Sec. 3. If a vacancy occurs in the office of tribal chief and less than one (1) year 
remains of his term of office, the office shall automatically be filled by the vice-chief 
of the tribal 
council.

Sec. 4. If a vacancy occurs in the office of tribal chief and more than one (1) year 
remains of his term of office, the tribal council shall, within sixty (60) days, cause to 
be held a special election in which all qualified voters of the tribe may participate for 
the purpose of filling vacancy. The Tribal vice-chief shall serve as tribal chief during 
the period of such vacancy until a new tribal chief is elected and seated.

Sec. 5. If a vacancy occurs in the office of vice-chief or of the secretary-treasurer of 
the tribal council, such a vacancy may be filled by the council by election of one of 
its members to the office.

Sec. 6. Any member of the tribal government (including the tribal chief and 
members of the tribal council) or any employee of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians, who during the term for which he is elected or appointed, is convicted of a 
felony shall be subject to removal from his office by action of the tribal council.

Sec. 7. Any of the eight (8) recognized Choctaw communities represented on the 
tribal council may petition for the recall of a member it has elected by presenting, 
at least six months prior to the expiration of such member’s term of office, a peti
tion signed by at least forty percent (40%) of the eligible voters in that community. 
Within sixty (60) days the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election on 
the question of recall. No council member shall be recalled except by the affirmative 
vote of a majority of those voting in an election in which at least sixty percent (60%) 
of the persons eligible to vote shall have voted. Should the recall be approved by the 
voters, Article VI, Sections 1 and 2, above, shall apply.

Sec. 8. The tribal council may remove council officers from office for cause by 
two-thirds (2/3) vote of the council members at a meeting at which a quorum is pres
ent, but can neither terminate nor affect their status as council members through such 
action. The tribal council shall prescribe the methods by which this removal from 
office may be carried out.

Sec. 9. The tribal chief may be removed from office if, at lease six months prior 
to the expiration of his or her term, a petition bearing the signatures of at least forty 
percent (40%) of the registered voters in the tribe is presented to the tribal council. 
Within sixty (60) days of such presentation, the tribal council shall cause to be held a 
special election on the question of recall. If a majority of those voting vote for recall, 
provisions of Article VI, Section 1 and 2, shall apply, provided that at least sixty 
percent (60%) of the eligible voters in the tribe shall have voted.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS

 
 The enrolled members of the eight Choctaw communities shall have the right to form 
local community organizations and adopt their own rules and regulations in harmony 
with this constitution and bylaws. It shall be the duty of the councilman from each 
community to report regularly all the actions and decisions of the tribal council to the 
community organizations.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Sec. 1. The legislative power of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians is vested 
in the tribal council and shall be exercised in accordance with this constitution and 
bylaws and the Constitution and Laws of the United States applicable to Indian 
tribes. In addition to exercising any other lawful legislative power of the Mississippi 
Band of Choctaw Indians, the tribal council is empowered:

(a) 

To negotiate with and to approve or disapprove contracts or agree
ments with Federal, State, or local governments, with private persons, 
or with corporate bodies.

(b) 

To approve or disapprove any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests inland, tribal funds, or other tribal assets.

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

(k) 

(1) 

To establish procedures for the conduct of all tribal government and 
business operations, including the regulation of conflict of interest and 
nepotism.

To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation 
estimates of Federal projects for the benefit of the Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians prior to the submission of such estimates to the 
Office of Management and Budget and to Congress.

To employ and pay legal counsel, subject to the approval of the Secre
tary of the Interior so long as such approval is required by Federal law.

To appropriate available tribal funds for the benefit of the tribe or of 
any its communities.

To approve or disapprove operating budgets upon submission by the 
tribal chief.

To approve or disapprove all allocations or disbursement of tribal 
funds (or funds under the control of the tribe) not specifically appro
priated or authorized in a budget approved by the tribal council.

To establish and enforce rules, consistent with applicable Federal 
statutes and the regulations of the Secretary of the interior, for the 
management of tribal lands, including, but not limited to, the making 
and revocation of 
assignments, and the disposition of timber, oil, and mineral resources.

To create, or to provide by ordinance for the creation of organizations, 
including public and private corporations, for any lawful purpose, 
which may be non-profit or profit-making, and to regulate the activi
ties of such organizations by ordinance.

To promote and protect the health, peace, morals, education, and gen
eral welfare of the tribe and its members.

To borrow money from any source whatsoever without limit as to 
amount, and on such terms and conditions and for such consideration 
and periods of time as the tribal council shall determine; to use all 
funds thus obtained to promote the welfare and betterment of the tribe 
and of its members; to finance tribal enterprises; or to lend money thus 
borrowed.

(m)  To establish and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of tribal 

members; providing for the maintenance of law, order and the admin
istration of justice; regulating wholesale, retail, commercial, or indus
trial activities on tribal lands; establishing a tribal court; and defining 
the powers and duties of that court; subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior where such approval is required by Federal 
law.

(n) 

(o) 

(p) 

(q) 

(r) 

To establish a basic departmental structure for the tribal government 
executive branch.

To establish policies relating to tribal economic affairs and enterprises 
in accordance with this constitution and bylaws.

To pass any ordinances and resolutions necessary or incidental to the 
exercise of any of the foregoing powers and duties.

To do such acts of a governmental and public nature as are not prohib
ited by applicable laws or by this constitution and bylaws.

To levy and collect taxes and raise revenue to meet the needs of the 
tribe or to support tribal government operations.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF

 
 Sec. 1. The tribal chief of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall have the 
following executive powers and duties subject to any limitation imposed by the stat
utes or the Constitution of the United States or by this constitution and bylaws:

(a) 

To serve as the principal executive officer of the tribe and as head of 
the executive branch of the tribal government.

(b) 

To carry out policies established by the tribal council.

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

To negotiate contracts or agreements with Federal, State, or local 
governments, private persons, or corporate bodies and to submit them 
to the tribal council for approval.

To manage, administer and direct the operation of the tribal programs, 
activities, and services and to report to the tribal council the status of 
each program at lease annually.

To prepare budgets, budget estimates, and financial reports for submis
sion to or at the direction of the tribal council.

To provide for the proper receipt, deposit, disbursement, and account
ing of all funds (or funds under control of the tribe) consistent with 
this constitution and bylaws and such policies as may be established 
by the tribal council.

To provide for the protection and maintenance of the property, equip
ment, and official records of the tribe.

To provide for enforcement of the rules, regulations, and ordinances 
enacted by the tribal council.

To preside over the meeting of the tribal council and to vote only in 
case of a tie.

(j) 

To exercise such additional executive powers as are necessary or inci
dental to the performance of the powers and duties enumerated above, 
and which are neither specifically denied to the tribal chief herein.
 
 

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS OF INDIANS

 
 Sec. 1. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, in exercising powers of self
government shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or of the right of the 
people peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress of griev
ances.

(b)  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, 

papers, and effects against unreasonable search and seizure, nor issue 
warrants, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, 
and particularly describing the place to be searched and the person or 
thing to be seized.

(c) 

Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy.

(d)  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against him

self.

(e) 

Take any private property for a public use without just compensation.

(f) 

(g) 

Deny to any person in criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and 
public trial; to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; 
to be confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory 
process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and, at his own expense, 
to have the assistance of counsel for his defense.

Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and 
unusual punishment, and in no event impose for conviction of any 
one offense any penalty, punishment or fine, or otherwise impose a 
sentence involving a total term of imprisonment in a single criminal 
proceeding, greater than the punishments, penalties, sentences or fines 
authorized by the Indian Civil Rights Act, as amended, 25 U.S.C. Sec
tion 1302.

(h)  Deny to any persons within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its 
laws or deprive any person of liberty or property without due process 
of law.

(i) 

(j) 

Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law.

Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprison
ment, the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than six 
persons.

Sec. 2. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall be available to any person, 
in a court of the United States, to test the legality of his detention by order of the 
tribal court.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Sec. 1. The members of the tribe reserve to themselves the power to propose ordi
nances and resolution and to enact or reject the same at the polls independent of the 
tribal council, but subject to approval of the Secretary of the Interior as required by 
this constitution and bylaws. The members of the tribe also reserve power at their 
own option to approve or reject at the polls any act of the tribal council.

Sec. 2. The first power reserved by the members of the tribe is the initiative. Thirty 
percent (30%) of the registered voters shall have the right by petition to propose 
amendments to this constitution and bylaws and to propose ordinances and 
resolutions. The second power is the referendum which shall be ordered upon a 
petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters.

Sec. 3. Upon receipt of a request for an election in the form of an initiative or 
referendum petition, the tribal chief shall, after ascertaining that a sufficient number 
of registered voters have signed, cause to be held an election on the question or issue 
within sixty (60) days of receipt of said petition; provided, however, that an election 
on a constitutional amendment must be called by the Secretary of the Interior as 
provided in Article XIII. Thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters shall 
constitute a sufficient number of voters under this section.

Sec. 4. Any measures referred to the tribe by the initiative or by the referendum 
shall take effect and be in force when approval by a majority of the votes cast in such 
election in which at least forty percent (40%) of the registered voters have voted, 
except that measures requiring approval of the Secretary of the Interior shall not be 
effective until approved by him.

Sec. 5. All measures referred to the tribe for approval or disapproval by election 
shall begin with the words; “Be It Enacted by the Members of the Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians.”

Sec. 6. Referendum or initiative petitions filed under Article XI must be submit
ted under a cover letter signed by at least three (3) sponsors who are members of 
the tribe and who are registered to vote in tribal elections. Said cover letter must be 
signed by the sponsors in the presence of a registered notary public and said petitions 
must be filed in accordance with a procedure to be established by the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - REPEALAND SAVING CLAUSE

 
 Sec. 1. The constitution and bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians 
approved May 22, 1945, and revised in November 28, 1969, under the provisions 
of the Act of June 18, 1934, as amended, is hereby repealed and superseded by this 
constitution.

Sec. 2. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they are 
consistent with this constitution.

Sec. 3. In the event any sentence, paragraph or section of this constitution and 
bylaws shall be held unconstitutional or invalid by a Federal court of competent 
jurisdiction, the remaining sentences, paragraphs or sections shall remain valid and 
be presumed consistent with the United States Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified 
voters of the tribe voting at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior, provided that at least forty percent (40%) of those entitled to vote shall vote 
in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the 
Interior to call an election on any proposed amendment when requested by a suffi
cient number of qualified voters as provided in Article XI or by the tribal council.

10


BYLAWS OF THE 
MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF TRIBAL COUNCIL OFFICERS


Sec. 1. The vice-chief of the tribal council shall assist the tribal chief when called 
upon to do so by the chief and, in the absence of the tribal chief, it shall be his duty 
and responsibility to preside over tribal council meetings.

Sec. 2. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council shall insure that an accurate 
record of all transactions of the council is maintained. He shall submit promptly, to 
the Superintendent of the Choctaw Agency, copies of the minutes, resolutions 
adopted, and ordinances passed at all regular and special meetings of the tribal 
council as required by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 3. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council shall cause to be audited all 
tribal funds and accounts at least once each year and at such other times as required 
by the tribal council or by the Secretary of the Interior and shall sign and approve all 
disbursements of tribal funds (or funds under control of the tribe); he shall also sign 
and approve all contracts negotiated by the tribal chief on behalf of the tribe unless 
otherwise provided by the tribal council.

Sec. 4. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council, and such other officers and 
employees of the tribe, who are responsible for safeguarding tribal resources, shall 
be bonded and the cost of such bond shall be borne by the tribe. The amount of the 
bond shall be determined by the tribal council as required by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

Sec. 5. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council, by reason of his office, shall 
preside over such committees as are established by the tribal council on budgetary 
and financial matters.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEETINGS

 
 Sec. 1. The tribal council shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday in 
January, April, July, and October of each year. Special meetings of the tribal council:

(a)  may be called by the tribal chief when in his judgment they are re

quired.

(b) 

shall be called by the tribal chief at the written request of at least nine 
(9) members of the tribal council or a majority of the council member
ship, whichever is higher.

The business of special meetings shall be limited to the matters specified in the call.

Sec. 2. A majority of the members of the tribal council shall constitute a quorum 
for the transaction of any tribal business.

Sec. 3. The tribal council in the conduct of its business shall be governed by 
Robert’s Rules of Order.

11
 
 

ARTICLE III - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the enrolled mem
bers of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians voting in special election called 
for that pinpose by the Secretary of the Interior and in which at least thirty percent 
(30%) of those persons entitled to vote shall have voted, shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior for his approval. The date of such approval shall be effec
tive date of this constitution and bylaws.

12

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

CHOCTAW AGENCY 
 
 PHILADELPHIA, MISSISSIPPI 39350

Hr, Phillip Martin, Chief 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians 
Route 7, Box 21 
Philadelphia, Mississippi 39350

Dear Mr. Martin:

There Is enclosed the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi 

Band of Choctaw Indians which was approved by the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs on March 28, 1975.

Sincerely yours,

Superintendent

Enclosure

United States Department of the Interior
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 WASHINGTON, DC, 20245

Tribal Government 

Services

Through: Area Director/ Eastern Area Office

Mr. Robert C. Benn

Superintendent, Choctaw Agency

Dear Mr. Benn:

We have received the results of the election held on 
December 17, 1974, by the qualified voters of the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians. The election 
was called in accordance with an order duly 
approved on October 17, 1974, which permitted the 
qualified voters of the band to adopt or reject 
a proposed revised constitution and bylaws,

When the original draft of the proposed constitution 
and bylaws was submitted for Secretarial review, 
Article III of the bylaws contained a thirty percent 
adoption requirement. In conjunction with our 
approval action following the election it was 
discovered that the thirty percent requirement had 
been increased to forty percent. As you know, 
further action on the constitution has boon delayed 
pending clarification of this point as less than 
forty percent participated in the election. With 
the adoption of CHO-74-7S, the tribal council has 
adequately clarified this inconsistency, and we 
have made the necessary correction of Article III 
of the bylaws to reflect the council's true intent 
as requested.

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, 
signed by the election hoard members, the proposed 
revised constitution and bylaws was duly adopted 
by the voters.

The Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi 
Band of Choctaw Indians is hereby approved pursuant 
to the Authority delegated to me by. 230 DM 1.1 and 
returned for delivery to the band. 

Sincerely yours,

Enclosure

Commissioner of Indian Affairs
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Commissioner 

of Indian Affairs on October 17 . 1974, the attached Revised Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the band and was on Dec, 17, 1974, duly rejected adopted

by a vote of 325 for, and 237 against, in an election in which at- 

least thirty percent of the 1687 entitled to vote cast their 

ballots In accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 

of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), aS amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 

(49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

Election Board Member
 
  
  
 

 
 
 United States Department of the Interior  
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 Eastern Regional Office 
545 Marriott Drive. Suite 700 
Nashville. TN 37214

Tribal Government Services

MAY 0 3 2006

Honorable Phillip Martin
Chief, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians
P.O. Box 6010, Choctaw Branch
Choctaw, Mississippi 39350

Dear Chief Martin:

I have received the results of the Secretarial election held on April 11, 2006, conducted for the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (Band). The election was called in accordance with the 
original authorization of May 2, 2005, which was extended oil August 2, 2005, and December 
19, 2005. This authorization permitted the qualified voters of the Band to vote on the adoption 
or rejection of a proposed amendment to the Band’s Revised Constitution and Bylaws.

As evidenced by the “Certificate of Results of Election" signed by the Chairman and two 
members of the Election Board, proposed Amendment A was duly adopted by the voters of the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians on April 11, 2006. As there was no contest to the 
election by the close of business on April 17, 2006, the “Certificate of Results of Election" 
was accordingly finalized.

Amendment A is hereby approved pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Assistant 
Secretary-Indian Affairs. Having been duly adopted, Amendment A is hereby designated as 
Amendment No. 1 of the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of 
Choctaws. Enclosed are all the pertinent documents relating to this approval.

Director, Eastern Region

Enclosure

cc: Superintendent, Choctaw Agency

Office of Tribal Relations, MS-4519-MIB
 
  
  
 

 
 
 AMENDMENT NO. I 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Sec. 2. The tribal council shall consist of elected representatives from the eight (8) 
recognized Choctaw communities. Each community shall be entitled to representation on 
the tribal council according to population as is hereinafter provided;

Bogue Chitto Community 3
Conehatta Community 3
Pearl River Community 3
Red Water Community 2
Standing Pine Community 2
Tucker Community 2
Bogue Homa Community 1
Crystal Ridge Community I
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Sec. 7.' In the regular tribal council election of June, 1975, eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms and eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for two (2) year terms, to wit:

Bogue Chitto Community
Conehatta Community
Pearl River Community
Red Water Community
Standing Pine Community
Tucker Community
Bogue Homa Community

4 Year Terms
1
1
1
2
1
1
1

2 Year Terms
2
2
2
0
1
1
0

For the June, 1975, tribal election, the candidate receiving the most votes in each 
community will be elected to serve for a 4-year term, with the other candidate(s) being 
elected to serve 2-year term. This provision does not apply to the Red Water and Bogue 
Homa Communities.

Beginning with the regular tribal council election of June, 1977, and continuing 
thereafter, all council representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms.

Upon approval of this paragraph by the Secretary of the Interior, a special election shall 
be held for the elected representative from the Crystal Ridge Community. Thereafter, 
regular elections for the Crystal Ridge representative shall be held in election years in 
which there is not a regular election for the election of tribal chief.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 7. Any of the eight (8) recognized Choctaw communities represented on the 
tribal council may petition for the recall of a member it has elected by presenting, at least 
six months prior to the expiration of such member’s term of office, a petition signed by at 
least forty percent (40%) of the eligible voters in that community. Within sixty (60) days 
the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election on the question of recall. No 
council member shall be recalled except by the affirmative vote of a majority of those 
voting in an election in which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the persons eligible 
to vote shall have voted. Should the recall be approved by the voters, Article VI, 
Sections I and 2, above, shall apply.
 
 

ARTICLE VII-COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS

 
 The enrolled members of the eight Choctaw communities shall have the right to form 
local community organizations and adopt their own rules and regulations in harmony 
with this constitution and bylaws. It shall be the duty of the councilman from each 
community to report regularly all the actions and decisions of the tribal council to the 
community organizations.

approval

I, Franklin Keel, Director, Eastern Regional Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue
of the authority delegated to the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs by the Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to me, do hereby approve the 
foregoing Amendment No. I to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi
Band of Choctaw Indians; provided, that nothing in this approval would be contrary to 
Federal law.

Director, Eastern Regional Office

Date: MAY 0 3 2006
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Eastern Regional Director, Bureau of Indian 

Affairs, on May 2, 2005 and extended on December 19, 2005, the attached Amendment 

to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians was 

submitted to the qualified voters of the Band and was on April 11,2006,  duly 

adopted / rejected by a vote of 140 for, and 30 against, in an election in which at 

least forty percent of the 288 entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended 

by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

Election Board Member

Election Board Member

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

 
 Eastern Regional Office 
545 Marriott Drive, Suite 700 
Nashville, TN 37214

MAR 0 8 2013

Tribal Government Services

Honorable Phyliss J. Anderson
Chief, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians
Choctaw Branch
P.O. Box 6010
Choctaw, Mississippi 39350

Dear Chief Anderson:

A Secretarial Election was held on February 19, 2013, to vote on three proposed Constitutional 
Amendments to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.

Pursuant to 25 Code of Federal Regulations Part 81.24, by authority delegated to the Regional 
Director by the Secretary of Interior, I hereby approve the election results for the following 
Amendments:

1.  Amendment A - Article X, Section 1(g).
2.  Amendment B - Article VI, Section 7 and Section 9.
3.  Amendment C - Article IV, Section 5 and Section 6.

Please provide a copy of the newly amended Constitution and Bylaws to the Eastern Regional 
Office, Branch of Tribal Government Services, when the new amendments are incorporated.

If you have any questions, please contact Ms. Chanda Joseph, Tribal Relations Specialist, at 615- 
564-6750.

Enclosure

Director, Eastern Region

AMENDMENT A - ARTICLE X, SECTION 1(g)

Sec. 1. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, in exercising powers of self

government shall not:

(g) Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and 
unusual punishment and in no event impose for conviction of any 
offense any penalty, punishment or fine, or otherwise impose a sentence 
involving a total term of imprisonment in a single criminal proceeding, 
greater than the punishments, penalties, sentences or fines authorized 
by the Indian Civil Rights Act, as amended, 25 U.S.C. Section 1302

AMENDMENT B - ARTICLE VI, SECTION 7 AND SECTION 9

Sec.7. Any of the eight (8) recognized Choctaw communities represented 
on the tribal council may petition for the recall of a member it has 
elected by presenting, at least six months prior to the expiration of 
such member’s term of office, a petition signed by at least forty percent 
(40%) of the eligible voters in that community. Within sixty (60) 
days the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election on the 
question of recall. No council member shall be recalled except by the 
affirmative vote of a majority of those voting in an election in which at 
leas sixty percent (60%) of the persons eligible to vote shall have voted. 
Should the recall be approved by the voters, Article VI, Sections 1 and 
2, above, shall apply; and

Sec.9. The tribal chief may be removed from office if, at least six months 

prior to the expiration of his or her term, a petition bearing the 
signatures of at least forty percent (40%) of the registered voters in the 
tribe is presented to the tribal council. Within sixty (60) days of such 
presentation, the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election 
on the question of recall. If a majority of those voting vote for recall, 
provisions of Article VI, Section 1 and 2, shall apply, provided that at 
least sixty percent (60%) of the eligible voters in the tribe shall have 
voted.

AMENDMENT C - ARTICLE IV, SECTION 5 AND SECTION 6

Sec.5. Any enrolled member of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians may 

become a candidate for Tribal Council to be filled by tribal election 
who

(a)  Is at lease 21 years of age at the time of election;

(b)  Has not been convicted of, or pled nolo contendere to, any felony 

offense occurring at any time in any jurisdiction, unless such felony has 
been pardoned;

(c)  Has a minimum of a High School diploma or a GED of a twelfth grade 

equivalency;

(d)  Is a resident of the Choctaw community which he or she desires to 
represent for at least six (6) months prior to the date of election;

(e)  Is registered to vote in the Choctaw community which he desires to 

represent;

(f)  Secures endorsement signatures by at least 10 persons registered to 

vote in tribal elections in the community from which he or she intends 
to run office. (This requirement shall not apply to the Bogue Homa 
Community and Crystal Ridge Community where three signatures will 
be required)

Sec.6. Any enrolled member of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians may 

be come a candidate for Chief who

(a)  Is at least 30 years of age by the time of election;

(b)  Has not been convicted of, or pled nolo contendere to, any felony 

offense occurring at any time in any jurisdiction, unless such felony 
conviction has been pardoned;

(c)  Has a minimum of a High School diploma or a GED of a twelfth grade 

equivalency;

(d)  Is a community resident registered to vote in a community;

(e)  Secures the endorsement signatures of a least 51 registered voters, at 

least nine each from Pearl River, Bogue Chitto, and Conehatta, at least 
six each from Tucker, Red Water, and Standing Pine, and at least three 
from Bogue Homa and Crystal Ridge.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, Franklin Keel, Regional Director, Eastern Regional Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by 

virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 

Stat. 984), as amended, and further delegated to me by 3 IAM 4.4, do hereby approve 

Amendment A (Resolution CHO 13-011(B)), Amendment B (Resolution CHO 13-012(B)), and 

Amendment C (Resolution CHO 13-013(B)), of the Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi 

Band of Choctaw Indians. These amendments are effective as of this date: PROVIDED that 

nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that 

would be contrary to Federal law.

Date:MAR 0 8 2013

Director, Eastern Region
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial Election authorized by the Regional Director on November 16, 2012, 
the attached Constitution and Bylaws (Amendment A, Amendment B and Amendment C) of the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians was submitted to the qualified voters of the Tribe and on 
February 19, 2013, was duly (adopted) (ratified) (rejected) or (revoked) by a vote for 
Amendment A, 593 for and 284 against, for Amendment B, 607 for and 261 against, for 
Amendment C, 675 for and 198 against, and four (4) cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated in 
an election in which at least 40 percent of the 1891 members entitled to vote, cast their ballot 
in accordance with 25 CFR Part 81.

Secretarial Election Board:

Rheta D. Harjo, Chairman

Date

Berdie John, Member

Date

Wanda Davidson, Member 

Date

Danita D. Willis, Member 

Date

Amy Pauls, Member

Date

Jeremiah Harrison, Member

Date

Gary Williamson, Alternate

