 
  
  
  
 y 
 

CONSTITUTION

AND

LAWS

OF

 
 The Choctaw Nation.

together with the 
 

TREATIES

OF

 
 1837, 1855, 1865 and 1866.
 
  
 

PUBLISHED BY AUTHORITY OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

BY

 
 A. R. DURANT,
Commissioned for the Purpose, 
 

AND


DAVIS HOMER and BEN WATKINS, Assistant Compilers.

DALLAS, TEXAS:
JOHN F. WORLEY, PRINTER AND PUBLISHER, 
1894.
 
 

 
CONSTITUTION

OF THE

 
 CHOCTAW NATION.

We, the representatives of the people inhabitating 
the Choctaw nation, contained within the following 
limits, to wit: Beginning at a point on the Arkansas 
river, one hundred paces east of old Fort Smith, where 
the western boundary line of the State of Arkansas 
crosses the said river, and running thence due south to 
Red river; thence up Red river to the point where the 
meridian of one hundred degrees west longitude crosses 
the same; thence north along said meridian to the main 
Canadian river ; thence down said river to its junction 
with the Arkansas river; thence down said river to the 
place of beginning, except the territory bounded as fol
lows, to-wit: Beginning on the north bank of Red river, 
at the mouth of Island Bayou, where it empties into Red 
river, about twenty-six miles on a straight line below 
the mouth of False Washita; thence running a north
westerly course along the main channel of said bayou, 
to the junction of the three prongs of said bayou, near
est the dividing ridge between Washita and Low Blue 
rivers, as laid down on Capt. R. L. Hunter’s map; thence 
northerly along the eastern prong of Island Bayou to 
its source; thence due north to the Canadian river; 
thence west along the main Canadian to the ninety eighth 

degree of west longitude ; thence south to Red river, and 
thence down Red river to the place of beginning; Pro
vided, however, if the line running due north from the 
eastern source of Island Bayou, to the main Canadian 
shall not include Allen’s or Wa-pa-nacka Academy 
within the Chickasaw district; then an offset shall be 
made from said line, so as to leave said academy 
two miles within the Chickasaw district, north, west and 
south from the lines of boundary, said boundaries being 
the limits of the Chickasaw district—assembled in con
vention at the town of Doaksville, on Wednesday, the 
eleventh day of January, one thousand eight hundred 
and sixty, in pursuance of an act of the general council, 
approved October 24, 1859, in order to secure to the cit
izens thereof the right of life, liberty and property, do 
ordain and establish the following constitution and form 
of government, and do mutually agree with each other 
to form ourselves into a free and independent nation, not 
inconsistent with the constitution, treaties and laws of 
the United States, by the name of the Choctaw Nation.

DISTRICT BOUNDARIES.

For the convenience and good government of the 
people of the Choctaw nation, we do make, ordain and 
establish four districts in this nation, to be known by 
the following names and boundaries, viz: Mosholatubbee 
district, Pushamataha district, Apuckshunnubbee district 
and Hotubbee district.

The boundary line of Mosholatubbee district shall 
begin near old Fort Smith, where the Arkansas boundary 
line crosses the Arkansas river; thence up said river to the 
Canadian fork; thence up said Canadian to where the 
Chickasaw district boundary strikes the same, as de 
fined by the treaty of 1855; thence along the said boun
dary to where it strikes the dividing ridge between the 

Canadian and Red rivers; thence easterly along said 
dividing ridge to the western boundary of the state of 
Arkansas ; thence along said Arkansas line to the be
ginning.

The boundary of Apucksh unnubbee district shall 
begin on Red river, where the Arkansas Stateline strikes 
the same; thence running up said river to the mouth of 
Kiamichi; thence up said river to the mouth of Jack’s 
fork; thence up said Jack’s fork to the old military 
road; thence along said road to the boundary line of 
Mosholatubbee district, on the top of the dividing ridge, 
between the Arkansas and Red rivers ; thence easterly 
along said boundary to the western boundary line of the 
state of Arkansas; thence along the said state line to 
the beginning.

The boundary of Pushamataha district shall begin 
on Red river at the mouth of Kiamichi: thence running 
up said Red river to the mouth of Island Bayou, to 
where the eastern boundary line of the Chickasaw dis
trict strikes said river, as defined by the treaty of 1855; 
thence along said boundary line to the dividing ridge 
between the Canadian and Red rivers ; thence easterly 
along said ridge to the line of Mosholatubbee district, 
on the top of the dividing ridge, to where the district 
line of Apuckshunnubbee district intersects Mosholatub
bee disirict; thence southerly along said line to the 
beginning.

The boundaries of Hotubbee district shall be em
braced within the limits of the ninety-eighth and one 
hundredth degree of west longitude, and between Red 
river and Canadian river, known as the “Lease Land.”

ARTICLE I.
DECLARATION OF RIGHTS.

That the general, great and essential principles of 

liberty and free government may be recognized and es
tablished, we declare:

Section 1. That all free men, when they form a so
cial compact, are equal in rights, and that no man or set 
of men are entitled to exclusive, separate public emolu
ment or privileges from the community, but in consider
ation of public services.

Sec. 2. That all political power is inherent in the 
people, and all free governments are founded on their au
thority and established for their benefit, and therefore 
they have at all times an inalienable and indefeasible 
right to alter, reform or abolish their form of government 
in such manner as they may think proper or expedient.
Sec. 3. There shall be no establishment of religion 
by law. No preference shall ever be given by law to 
any religious sects, society, denomination or mode of 
worship, and no religious test shall ever be allowed as a 
qualification to any public trust under this government.
Sec. 4. No human authority ought in any case 
whatever to control or interfere with the rights of con
science in matters of religion.

Sec. 5. No person shall for the same offence be 
twice put in jeopardy of life or limb, nor shall any per
son’s property be taken or applied to public use without 
the consent of the general council, and without just com
pensation being first made therefor.

Sec. 6. No person shall ever be appointed or elect
ed to any office in this nation for life or during good be
havior, but the tenure of all offices shall be for some 
limited period of time, if the person appointed or elected 
thereto so long behave well.

Sec. 7. The right of trial by jury shall remain in

violate.

Sec. 8. Every citizen has a right to bear arms in 

defence of himself and his country.

Sec. 9. That the printing-press shall be free to ev
ery person, and no law shall ever be made to restrain 
the rights thereof. The free communication of opinion 
is one of the inviolable rights of man, and every citizen 
may freely speak, write and print on any subject, being 
responsible for abuse of that liberty.

Sec. 10. That the people shall be secure in their 
persons, houses, papers and possessions from unreason
nble seizures and searches, and that no warrant to search 
any place or to seize any person or thing shall issue, 
without describing the place to be searched and the per
son or thing to be siezed as nearly as may be. nor with
out probable cause supported by oath or affirmation. 
But in all cases where suspicion rests on any person or 
persons of conveying or secreting whisky or other intox
icating liquors, the same shall be liable to search or 
seizure as may be hereafter provided by law.

Sec. 11. That no free man shall be taken, or im
prisoned, or disseized of his freehold liberties or privil
eges, or outlawed, or exiled, or in any manner destroyed 
or deprived of his life, liberty, and property, but by the 
judgment of his peers or the law of the land.

Sec. 12. No person shall ever be imprisoned for 

debt.

Sec. 13. That excessive bail shall not be required, 
nor excessive fines imposed, nor cruel or unusual pun
ishments inflicted.

Sec. 14. That all courts shall be open and every 
person for an injury done him in his lands, goods, per
son or reputation, shall have remedy by due course of 
law, and right and justice administered without sale, de
nial or delay.

Sec. 15. That the citizens have a right in a peace
able manner, to assemble together for their common 
good, to instruct their representatives, and apply to 
those invested with the powers of the government for re
dress of grievances, or other proper purposes, by peti
tion, address or remonstrance.

Sec. 16. That no power of suspending laws shall 
be exercised except by the general council or its author
ity.

Sec. 17. That in all criminal prosecutions, the accused 
hath a right to be heard by himself or counsel, or both, 
to demand the nature and cause of the accusation, to be 
confronted by the witnesses against him, to have a com
pulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor; and 
in all prosecutions by indictment or information, a speedy 
and public trial by an impartial jury of the county 
or district where the offence was committed; that he can
not be compelled to give evidence against himself, nor 
can he be deprived of his life, liberty, or property, but 
by due course of law.

Sec. 18. That all prisoners shall, before conviction, 
be bailable by sufficient securities, except for capital of
fenses, where the proof is evident or the presumption 
great, and the privilege of the writ of habeas corpus 
shall not be suspended, unless when in case of rebellion 
or invasion, the public safety may require it.

Sec. 19. That the general council shall have power 
to pass general laws in regard to the collection of fines, 
bonds, forfeitures, and court fees, and direct the manner 
of such collection.

Sec. 20. No property qualification for eligibility to 
office, or for the right of suffrage, shall ever be required 
by law in this nation.

Sec. 21. No conviction for any offense shall work

corruption of blood and forfeiture of estate. The gener
al council shall pass no bill of attainder, retrospective 
law, nor law impairing the obligation of contracts.

ARTICLE II.

DISTRIBUTION OF POWER.

Section 1. The powers of government of the Choc
taw nation shall be divided into three distinct depart
ments, and each of them confined to a separate body of 
magistracy, to wit: Those which are legislative to one, 
those which are executive to another, and those which 
are judicial to another.

Sec. 2. No person or collection of persons, being 
of one of those departments, shall exercise any power 
properly belonging to either of the others, except in the 
instances hereafter expressly directed or permitted by 
the general council.

ARTICLE III.

LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT.

Section 1. The legislative power of this nation 
shall be vested in a general council which shall consist 
of a senate and house of representatives, and the style 
of their laws shall be, “Be it enacted by the general 
council of the Choctaw nation assembled.”

Sec. 2. The senate of the Choctaw nation shall be 
composed of four senators from each district, chosen by 
the qualified electors thereof, for the term of two years.
Sec. 3. No person shall be a senator who shall not 
have attained the age of thirty years and been one year 
a citizen of this nation, and who shall not, when elected, 
be an inhabitant of that district at least six months pre 
ceding his election for which he shall be chosen.

Sec. 4. The house of representatives shall be com
posed of members chosen every year by the qualified 
electors in the several counties of each district, at the 
ratio of one representative to every one thousand citi
zens; nevertheless when there is a fractional number of 
five hundred or more citizens in any county, they shall 
be entitled to one additional representative; but when 
the population of any one of the counties shall not reach 
the ratio of one thousand, they shall still be allowed one 
representative.

Sec. 5. In case of death, resignation, or inability of 
any of the senators or representatives, the principal 
chief shall have the power to make temporary appoint
ments and fill vacancies that may occur in any of the 
counties.

Sec. 6. No person shall be a representative, unless 
he be a citizen of this nation, and shall have been an in
habitant thereof six months next preceding his election, 
and the last month thereof a resident of the county for 
which he shall be chosen, and shall have attained the 
age of twenty one years.

Sec. 7. The house of representatives, when assembled 
shall choose a speaker and its other officers, and the senate 
 shall choose a president and its officers, and each shall 
judge of the qualifications and elections of its own mem
bers, but a contested election shall be determined in 
such manner as shall be directed by law. A majority 
of each house shall constitute a quorum to do business, 
but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day and 
may compel the attendance of absent members in such 
manner and under such penalties as each house may 
provide.

Sec. 8. Every bill which shall have passed both 
houses of the legislature shall be presented to the 
principal chief; if he approve he shall sign it, but if not

he shall return it, with his objections, to the house in 
which it shall have originated, who shall enter the ob
jections at large upon the journal and proceed to recon
sider it; if, after such reconsideration, two-thirds of the 
members present shall agree to pass the bill, it shall be 
sent with the objections to the other house, by which it 
shall likewise be reconsidered; if approved by two- 
thirds of the members present of that house it shall be
come a law, but in such ease the vote of both houses 
shall be determined by the yeas and nays, and the names 
of the members voting for and against the bill be en
tered on the journals of each house respectively ; if any 
bill shall not be returned by the principal chief within 
three days (Sundays excepted) after it shall have been 
presented to him, the same shall become a law in like 
manner as if he had signed it. Every bill presented to 
the principal chief one day previous to the adjournment 
of the legislature, and not returned to the house in which 
it originated before its adjournment, shall become a law 
and have the same force and effect as if signed by the 
principal chief.

Sec. 9. Each house may determine the rules of its 
own proceedings, punish members for disorderly be
havior, and with the consent of two-thirds, expel a mem
ber, but not a second time for the same cause.

Sec. 10. Each house shall keep a journal of its 
proceedings and publish the same, and the yeas 
and nays of the members of either house, on any ques
tion, shall, at the desire of any three members present, 
be entered on the journal.

Sec. 11. Each house may punish by imprison
ment, during the session, any person not a member, for 
disrespectful or disorderly behavior in its presence, or 
for obstructing any of its proceedings, provided such 

imprisonment shall not at any one time exceed forty- 
eight hours.

Sec. 12. Neither house shall, without the consent 
of the other, adjourn for more than three days, nor to 
any other place than that in which they may be sitting.
Sec. 13. Each member of the general council shall 
receive from the public treasury a compensation for his 
services, which may be increased or diminished by law; 
but no increase of compensation shall take effect during 
the session at which such increase shall have been made.
Sec. 14. No person who hath heretofore been, or 
hereafter may be a collector or holder of public moneys, 
shall have a seat in either house of the general council, 
until such person shall have accounted for, and paid into 
the treasury, all sums for which he may be accountable.
Sec. 15. The first election for senators and rep
resentatives shall be general throughout the nation, and 
shall be held on the first Wednesday in August, 1860, 
and thereafter there shall be biennial elections for 
senators.

Sec. 16. Senators and representatives shall, in all 
cases except of treason, felony, or breach of the peace, 
be privileged from arrest during the session of the gen
eral council, and in going to and returning from the 
same.

ARTICLE IV.

JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT.

Section 1. The judicial power of this nation shall 
be vested in one supreme court, in circuit and county 
courts.

Sec. 2. Until Hotubbee district shall be duly or
ganized, and officers elected therein under this constitu
tion, the supreme court shall be composed of three supreme 

judges, one to be chosen from Apuckshunnubbee 
district, one from Pushamataha district, and one from 
Mosholatubbee district, one of whom shall be styled 
chief justice, and two of whom shall constitute a quorum 
to do business.

Sec. 3. The supreme court shall have no jurisdic
tion but such as properly belongs to a court of errors 
and appeals.

Sec. 4. The supreme judges shall have power to 
issue writs and other process necessary to the exercise 
of their appellate jurisdiction, and shall have original 
jurisdiction only in such cases as may hereafter be pro
vided by law, and shall be conservators of the peace 
throughout the nation.

Sec. 5. The circuit courts shall be composed of one 
circuit judge in each district, and shall have original ju
risdiction in all criminal cases which shall not be other
wise provided for by law, and exclusive original juris
diction in all crimes amounting to felony, and original 
jurisdiction of all civil cases which shall not be cogniza
ble before the judges of the county, until otherwise di
rected by law, and original jurisdiction in all matters of 
contracts, and in all matters of controversy where the 
same is over fifty dollars. It shall hold its term at such 
times and places in each district as are now specified by 
law or may hereafter be provided.

Sec. 6. The circuit courts shall exercise a superin
tending control over the county courts, and shall have 
power to issue all necessary writs and process to carry 
into effect their general and specific powers under such 
regulations and restrictions as may be provided by law,
Sec. 7. The circuit judge in each district shall be 
elected by the qualified voters of their respective dis
tricts, and the general council by a joint vote of both 

houses shall elect the supreme judges. Any person re
ceiving the highest number of votes cast shall be elected.
Sec. 8. The judges of the supreme court shall be 
at least thirty years of age, and the circuit judge of the 
circuit courts shall be at least twenty five years of age 
before they shall be eligible to hold the office, and when 
elected they shall serve for the term of four years from 
the date of their commission; they shall appoint their 
own clerks under such provisions as the law may pre
scribe.

Sec. 9. The judges of the supreme court and circuit 
courts shall at stated times receive such compensation 
for their services, which shall not be increased or dimin
ished during the term for which they are elected, as may 
be determined by law. They shall not be allowed any 
fees or perquisites of office.

Sec. 10. There shall be a court established in each 
county of this nation, to be called county courts, which 
shall have jurisdiction in all matters relative to disburse
ment of money for county purpose, and in every other 
Case that may be necessary to the internal improve
ments and local concerns of their respective counties.

Sec. 11. The judges of the county court shall in no 
case have jurisdiction to try and determine any criminal 
case or penal offense against this nation, but may sit as 
examining courts, and commit, discharge, or recognize 
to the court having jurisdiction for further trial of all 
offenses against the peace and dignity of this nation; 
for the foregoing purposes, they shall have power to 
issue all necessary writs and process, to bind any per
son to keep the peace, or to give security for his good 
behavior.

Sec. 12. The county judges shall be elected by the 
qualified electors of their respective counties, and shall 

be commissioned by the principal chief, and shall hold 
their office for the term of two years.

Sec. 13. No judge shall preside on the trial of any 
cause in the event of which he may be interested, or 
where either of the parties shall be connected to him by 
affinity or consanguinity within such degrees as may be 
prescribed by law, or in which he may have been of 
council, or have presided in any circuit or county courts, 
except by consent of all parties. In case any or all of 
the judges of the supreme court shall be thus disquali
fied from presiding on any cause, or causes, the court or 
judges thereof shall certify the same to the principal 
chief of the nation, who shall immediately commission 
the requisite number of men learned in the law for the 
trial and determination thereof. But in case such dis
qualification should take place in any of the circuit or 
county judges, the circuit or county judge shall have 
the power to appoint a substitute for that particular 
case for which he may be disqualified.

Sec. 14. Judges shall not charge juries with regard 
to matter of fact, but may state the testimony and de
clare the law.

Sec. 15. There shall be a prosecuting attorney 
elected in each district by the qualified electors of their 
respective districts, whose compensation and term of 
service shall be prescribed by law.

Sec. 16. The general council shall have power by 
law to prescribe the manner of holding and determining 
suits in the circuit and county courts and the manner of 
granting appeals.

Sec. 17. The county judges in addition to their re
spective duties that may be required of them by law, shall 
be judges of the courts of probate and have such jurisdic
tion in matters relative to the estate of deceased persons, 

executors, administrators and guardians as may be pre
scribed by law, until otherwise directed by the general 
council.

Sec. 18. Writs and other process shall run in the 
name of the Choctaw nation and bear test and be signed 
by the clerks of their respective courts from which they 
issue, and all indictments shall conclude against the 
peace and dignity of the Choctaw nation.

Sec. 19. The general council shall provide by law 

for determining contested elections of county judges.

Sec. 20. The supreme court shall be held twice in 
each year at the seat of government of the Choctaw na
tion.

Sec. 21. The county judges shall appoint their own 

clerks, who shall act as treasurer of the county.

ARTICLE V.

EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT.

Section 1. The supreme executive power of the 
Choctaw nation shall be vested in one principal chief, 
assisted by three subordinate district chiefs, who shall 
hold their respective offices for the term of two years 
from the time of their installation. But they shall not be 
eligible for the same office for more than two terms in 
succession.

Sec. 2. The principal chief of the Choctaw nation 
shall be elected by the qualified electors of the Choc
taw nation, and the subordinate chiefs of the Choctaw 
nation shall be elected by the qualified electors of their 
respective districts on the first Wednesday in August, 
eighteen hundred and sixty, and every two years there
after.

Sec. 3. The returns of every election for principal 
chief shall be made out, sealed up and transmitted to the 
supreme judges of each district, to be forwarded by him 
to the national secretary who shall deliver them to the 
speaker of the house of representatives during the first 
week of its organization, who shall proceed to open and 
count the votes in the presence of both houses of the 
general council, and the person having the highest num
ber of votes shall be declared principal chief by the 
speaker. But if two or more shall be equal or highest 
in votes, then one of them shall be chosen principal 
chief by the joint ballot of both houses of the general 
council; but the returns of every election for district and 
county officers shall be made out, sealed and transmit
ted to the supreme judge of each district who shall pro
ceed to open, take an abstract, and declare what candi
dates for district and county offices are elected, and for
ward a true copy of the same to the national secretary 
who shall file them in his office for safe keeping.

Sec. 4. In case of death, resignation or removal of 
the principal chief, the president of the senate shall ex
ercise the duties of principal chief until the next regular 
election for that office; but should the vacancy be on 
account of the inability of the principal chief to dis
charge his duties, the president of the senate shall exer
cise the said duties until such inability shall be re
moved.

Sec. 5. In case of any vacancy occurring in the 
office of district chiefs, the principal chief shall have the 
power to appoint a chief pro tern. in the district where 
such vacancy may occur until the next regular election 
for that office.

Sec. 6. No person shall be eligible to the office of 
principal or district chief unless he shall have attained 
the age of thirty years, and have been an inhabitant of 

the Choctaw nation at least five years next preceding 
his election.

Sec. 7. The principal chief shall from time to time 
give to the general council information of the state of 
the government, and recommend to their consideration 
such measures as he may deem expedient.

Sec. 8. The principal chief shall take care that the 

laws be faithfully executed.

Sec. 9. The principal chief may, by proclamation, 
on extraordinary occasions, convene the general council 
at the seat of government, or at a different place if that 
have become, since their last adjournment, dangerous 
from an enemy or from contagious disease.

Sec. 10. In case of disagreement between the two 
houses with respect to the time of adjournment, the 
principal chief may adjourn them to such a time as he 
shall think best, not beyond the day of the next meeting 
of the general council.

Sec. 11. All vacancies which may occur in offices 
that are elective by the people or general council, the 
principal chief shall have the power to fill such vacan
cies by appointment until the next regular election.

Sec. 12. No person shall hold the office of princi
pal or district chief, and any other office or commission, 
either in this nation, or under any state, or in the United 
States or any power, at one and the same time.

Sec. 13. The district chiefs shall have such super
intending control over the affairs of their respective dis
tricts as may be prescribed by the general council. It 
shall be their duty to have the laws properly enforced 
within their respective limits. They shall from time to 
time report to the principal chief such information re
specting the affairs of their districts, and recommend for 
his consideration such measures as they may deem ex
pedient.

Sec. 14. A sheriff and rangers shall be elected in 
each county by the qualified electors thereof, who shall 
hold their office for the term of two years unless sooner 
removed. And it shall be the duty of the district chiefs 
to appoint a competent number of light horsemen in their 
respective districts as may hereafter be provided by law, 
who shall hold their offices for the term of two years 
unless sooner removed.

Sec. 15. The principal chief, national secretary, 
national treasurer, national auditor, and national attor
ney, shall reside at or near the seat of government.
—SMITH—8

Sec. 16. The principal chief shall be head com

mander of the militia of this nation.

ARTICLE VI.

 IMPEACHMENTS.

Section 1. The house of representatives shall have 

the sole power of impeaching.

Sec. 2. All impeachments shall be tried by the 
senate. When sitting for that purpose, the senators 
shall be on oath or affirmation. No person shall be con
victed without the concurrence of two-thirds of the mem
bers present.

Sec. 3. The chiefs and all civil officers shall be 
liable to impeachment for any misdemeanor in office, but 
judgment in such case shall not extend further than re
moval from office and disqualification to hold any office 
of honor, trust or profit under this nation, but the party 
convicted shall nevertheless be liable, and subject to 
indictment, trial, and punishment according to law as in 
other cases.

ARTICLE VII.

GENERAL PROVISIONS.

Section 1. Until Hotubbee district shall be duly 
organized, the principal chief of the Choctaw nation 
shall exercise such authority over the citizens of this 
nation, living in that district, as he may deem expedient 
for the protection of person, life and property.

Sec. 2. No person shall be principal chief, or sub
ordinate chief, senator, or representative, unless he be a 
free male citizen of the Choctaw nation, and a lineal de
scendant of the Choctaw or Chickasaw race.

Sec. 3. The general council shall have the power to 
determine what county or counties shall be entitled to 
elect one or more senators in the several districts of this 
nation.

Sec. 4. Members of the general council and other 
officers, both executive and judicial, before they enter 
upon the duties of their respective offices shall take the 
following oath or affirmation, to-wit: “I do solmenly 
swear (or affirm, as the case may be,) that I will support 
the constitution of the Choctaw nation, and that I will 
faithfully and impartially discharge, to the best of my 
abilities, the duties of the office of--------------- accord-
to law. So help me God.”

Sec. 5. The general council shall have the power to 
determine the compensation of the principal chief, district 
chiefs and other officers of the nation, which compensa
tion shall not be increased or diminished for the term of 
years they are elected or appointed.

Sec. 6. The general council shall have power by 
law to specify the manner in which offenders against the 
laws of this nation, who may escape into the United 
States or into any Indian nation, or from one district 
into another in this nation, shall be demanded, apprehended 

and arraigned for trial in the several courts of 

this nation, having original jurisdiction thereof.

Sec. 7. Every free male citizen of this nation who 
shall have attained to the age of eighteen years, and who 
shall have been a citizen of the nation six months, shall 
be deemed a qualified elector, and shall be entitled to 
vote in the county or district where he may have actually 
resided at least one month preceding the election for each 
and every office made elective in this nation.

Sec. 8. All general elections shall be by ballot; and 
the electors in all cases, except in cases of treason, fel
ony, and breach of the peace, shall be privileged from ar 
rest during their attendance at elections and on going to 
and returning therefrom.

Sec. 9. The general council shall have the power 
by law to establish one or more precincts in each county 
in the several districts of this nation, and prescribe the 
mode and manner of holding and conducting elections.
Sec. 10. The oath of office may be administered by 
any of the judges of this nation until the general coun
cil shall otherwise direct.

Sec. 11. The general council shall have the power 
to pass such laws and measures as they shall deem ex
pedient for the general good of the Choctaw people, pro
vided no law be passed or adopted contrary to the pro
visions of this constitution.

Sec. 12. The mode of declaring war in this nation 
shall be by at least two-thirds of the members of the gen
eral council in full council, with the approval of the 
principal chief, unless in case of actual invasion by an 
enemy, in which case the people shall have the right to 
defend themselves until the council is convened by proc
lamation of the principal chief, and measures of defense 
prescribed.

Sec. 13. The principal chief shall have the power, 
by and with the advice and consent of the senate, to ap
point commissioners, or delegates, to transact such busi
ness as may become expedient to the Choctaw nation, 
and all other officers whose appointments are not herein 
or otherwise provided for.

Sec. 14. The general council of the Choctaw nation 
shall have the power to pass such laws as they may 
deem expedient to punish rebellion, treason, and other 
high crimes against the nation.

Sec. 15. All contested elections for principal chief 
and other officers shall be determined as the law may 
prescribe.

Sec. 16. The general council shall have the power 
to create by law such regulations and commissions, and 
appoint superintendents and such other officers, as the 
case may be, required for the promotion and advance
ment of all the schools of this nation.

Sec. 17. Eighteen thousand dollars of the interest 
money arising from the Chickasaw fund, granted to the 
Choctaws by convention held and concluded at Doaks
ville, shall be set apart annually for educational purpo
ses, and the remaining seven thousand dollars be set 
apart, annually, to be expended as the law may hereaf
ter direct.

Sec. 18. Any citizen of this nation who may find 
any mine or mines, or mineral waters, shall have exclu
sive right and privilege to work the same, so long as he 
may choose, within one mile in any direction from his 
works or improvements; provided, however, he does not 
interfere with the rights of the former settler.

Sec. 19. No person who denies the being of a God, 
or a future state of rewards and punishments, shall hold 

any office in the civil department of this nation, nor shall 
he be allowed his oath in any court of justice.

Sec. 20. The treasurer of this nation, together with 
all other persons who may be intrusted with public 
money, shall be required to give such bond and security 
as may be prescribed by law.

Sec. 21. No laws of a general nature, unless other
wise provided for, shall be enforced until sixty days 
after the passage thereof,

Sec. 22. No money shall be drawn from the treas
ury but in consequence of an appropriation made by 
law; an accurate statement of the receipts and expendi
tures of public moneys shall be attached to and pub
lished with the laws, at every regular session of the gen
eral council.

Sec. 23. That all the provisions in the constitution, 
now in existence, and not revised or adopted by this 
constitution are hereby declared null and void; and that 
any law which may be passed contrary to the provisions 
herein specified shall be null and void; and all rights 
and powers not herein granted or expressed shall be 
reserved unto the people.

Sec. 24. Divorces from the bond of matrimony shall 

not be granted but in cases provided for by law.

ARTICLE VIII.

MILITIA.

Section 1. The general council shall provide by 
law for organizing and disciplining the militia of this 
nation, in such manner as they shall deem expedient, 
not incompatible with the constitution, treaties and laws 
of the United States, in relation thereto.

Sec. 2. Officers of the militia shall be elected or 

appointed in such manner as the general council shall 
from time to time direct, and shall be commissioned by 
the principal chief.

Sec. 3. The principal chief shall have power to call 
forth the militia to execute the laws of the nation, to 
suppress insurrections and repel invasions.

ARTICLE IX.

MODE OF AMENDING AND REVISING THE CONSTITUTION.

Section 1. Whenever a majority of the members 
of the general council assembled shall deem it necessary, 
they may propose an amendment or amendments to this 
constitution; which amendment shall he submitted by 
the national secretary, at least four months preceding 
the next regular election, at which the qualified voters 
shall vote directly for and against such proposed amend
ment, or amendments; and if it shall appear that a 
majority of the qualified voters shall have voted in favor 
of such amendment, or amendments, then the same may 
be incorporated as a part of this constitution at the next 
succeeding general council.

Sec. 2. And if at any time two-thirds of the senate 
and the house of representatives shall think it necessary 
to revise and change this entire constitution, they shall 
recommend to the electors, at the next election for mem
bers of the general council, to vote for or against the 
convention, and it shall appear that a majority of the 
electors voting at such election, have voted in favor of 
calling a convention, the general council shall, at its next 
session, provide by law for calling a convention, to be 
holden within six months after the passage of such law; 
and such convention shall consist of delegates equal to 
the number of members in the house of representatives 
of the general council.

SCHEDULE.

Section 1. All matters now pending in the several 
courts of this nation shall be transferred to such courts 
as may have proper jurisdiction thereof under this con
stitution.

Sec. 2. All rights, prosecutions, claims on con
tracts, as well of individuals as bodies corporate, and 
laws now in force at the time of the adoption of this 
constitution, and not inconsistent therewith, until al
tered or repealed by the general council, shall remain in 
full force.

Sec. 3. Any special appointments or contracts here
tofore made and approved under existing laws or resolu
tions of the general council, shall be approved by the 
principal chief of this nation, and the appointees com
missioned, and contracts so made ratified by him.

Sec. 4. In order that no inconvenience may result 
to the public service, from the taking effect of this con
stitution, no office shall be suspended, nor any laws 
relative to the duties thereof be changed or abrogated, 
until the officers elected and appointed under this con
stitution shall be duly qualified and enter upon their 
respective duties.

Sec. 5. Immediately after the governor of this na
tion shall make proclamation that this constitution is 
ratified by the people, then it shall be the duty of the 
president of this convention to give notice forthwith to 
all the probate judges in this nation, directing them to 
hold an election on the first Wednesday in August A. 
D. 1860, for a principal chief and all other officers, dis
trict and county, provided for in this constitution, to be 
conducted in the manner prescribed by the existing 
election laws; should there be any vacancy, however, 
in the office of probate judge, then it shall be the duty 

of any of the county officers to order the said elections.
Sec. 6. The returns for the elections above directed 
shall be sent sealed to the president of this convention, 
who shall open and publish the same, giving certificates 
to those whom the returns show to be chosen for the va
rious offices; the returns for principal chief shall be 
transmitted as the constitution directs.

Sec. 7. The president of this convention shall call 
to his assistance two or more competent persons to aid 
him in making out the returns of the said elections.

Sec. 8. In the event the president of this conven
tion should die then the returns of the elections for 
principal chief and other officers, shall be transmitted to 
the national secretary, who shall proceed as in manner 
above directed.

Sec. 9. Until apportionment shall be made by law, 
in pursuance of this constitution, for the election of sen
ators, the counties of three districts, singly and severally, 
shall elect a senator or senators for members to the 
general council as follows :

In Apukshanubbee District.

Towson County 
Cedar County 
Wade County
Red River County 
Boktucklo County 
Eagle County 
Nashoba County

One Senator.
One Senator.

One Senator.

One Senator.

In Pushamataiia District.

Kiamichi County 
Blue County 
Atoka County
Jack’s Fork County

One Senator. 
One Senator. 
One Senator. 
One Senator.

In Mosholatubbee District.
Sugar-Loaf County, - - - One Senator. 
Skullyville County, - - - One Senator. 
Sans Bois County - - - - One Senator
Gaines County, 
Tobucksy County,

One Senator.

Sec. 10. The first election for members to the House 
of Representatives, under this constitution, shall consist 
of a number of members equal to the apportionment 
under the existing laws.
 
 

GEORGE HUDSON,

 
 President of the Convention. 

W. A. Dibrell, Clerk.

Delegates of the Convention:
 
  
  
 

FORBIS LEFLORE, 
 
 L. P. PITCHLYNN, 
ELLIS W. FOLSOM, 
WM. McCOY,  
 
JOSEPH DUKES, 
 
 WM. S. PATTON, 
 
  
  
 
EDMOND GARDNER, 
 
 JOSEPH P. FOLSOM, 
JOHN PICKEN (his X mark),  
 
STEPHEN HOLSON, 
 
 S. P. WILLIS, 
 
  
 
ALFRED SHONG, 
PLINY FISK, 
SIMON CONKLIL, 
PISTAMBEE, 
 
 PETER WATSON (his X mark),  
 
DANIEL MILLER, 
ADAM NAIL, 

 
  
 DAVIS KING. 
 

AMENDMENTS

TO THE

CONSTITUTION

OF THE

 
 CHOCTAW NATION.

Section 1. The national secretary, national treas
urer, national auditor, and national attorney shall be 
elected by the qualified electors of this nation, who shall 
hold their offices for the term of two years and until their 
successor are elected and qualified, unless sooner remov
ed; and they shall perform such duties as may be pre
scribed by law.

Sec. 2. The seat of government shall be perman
ently fixed at or about two and one half miles east of 
the old Nanih Waiya, and shall be called and known as 
Tushkahumma, and the first and all future sessions of 
the general council shall commence on the first Monday 
in October, 1884, and each and every year thereafter 
and shall be held at the Tushkahumma aforesaid.

