 
  
 REVISED CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS  
 
OF THE 
MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

PREAMBLE 

 
 We, the Choctaw Indians, members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians, desiring to promote the .achievement of self-government for the 
Choctaw people do, for our welfare and benefit, hereby adopt and proclaim 
the following constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME 

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Mississippi Band of

Choctaw Indians and may hereinafter be referred to as "the tribe."
 
 

ARTICLE II - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall 

extend to all lands now held or which may hereafter be acquired by or 
for or which may be used under proper authority by the Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians, and to all persons who are now or may hereafter 
become members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP 

 
 Sec. 1. The membership of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians 

shall consist of:

(a) All Choctaw Indians of one-half (1/2) or more Choctaw blood, 
resident in Mississippi, January 1, 1940, as shown by the
census roll maintained by the Bureau of Indian Affairs at the
Choctaw Agency, provided that the tribal council shall have 
the power to revise said rolls, with the approval of the

 Secretary of the Interior at any time. 

(b) Any child of one-half (1/2) or more Choctaw blood born to

any enrolled member of the band after January 1, 1940, shall
be entitled to membership.
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Sec. 2. The tribal council shall have the power to pass ordinances, 

subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, governing
future membership, loss of membership, and the adoption of new members; 
provided that no person of less than one-half degree of Choctaw blood 
shall be admitted to membership in the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians.
 
 

   ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY 

 
 Sec. 1. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall be governed 

by a tribal council and a tribal chief whose powers are enumerated in 
Articles VIII and IX herein. 

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall consist of elected representatives 

from the seven (7) recognized Choctaw communities. Each community shall
 be entitled to representation on the tribal council according to popula
tion as is hereinafter provided:

Bogue Chitto Community 
Conehatta Community 
Pearl River Community 
Red Water Community 
Standing Pine Community 
Tucker Community 
Bogue Homa Community 

3
3
3
2
2
2
1

Sec. 3. The tribal chief shall be elected by the Choctaw people 

at. large with each registered voter entitled to one vote.

Sec. 4. The tribal council shall have authority to make changes 

in the number of representatives from each community according to future 
community needs, community population changes or applicable Federal law, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 5. In order to qualify for and seek election to a seat on the 

tribal council, a person must

(a) be an enrolled member of the tribe.
(b) claim residence by registration in the community which he
 intends to represent.
(c) be at least 21 years of age.

Sec. 6. In order to qualify for and seek election to the office of 

tribal chief, a person must

(a) be an enrolled member of the tribe.

  (b) be at least 30 years of age prior to the date of election.
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Sec. 1. Any member of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, 

whether male or female, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more and 
registered according to rules set forth by the tribal council, shall 
be entitled to vote in any tribal election.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall prescribe rules and regulations 
to govern the conduct of tribal elections consistent with this constitution 
and bylaws. All elections shall be by secret ballot.

Sec. 3. The first regular election under this revised constitution 

and bylaws shall take place in June 1975. Subsequent thereto, regular 
elections shall be held in June of odd-numbered years. The present 
tribal council representatives shall remain in office until their 
successors are duly elected and seated.  
 
 

-

 
 Sec. 4. In all tribal council elections, the person receiving the lar

gest number of votes for a given position shall be declared elected.

Sec. 5. For the election of the tribal chief, the person receiving 

a majority of the total votes cast for all candidates shall be declared 
the tribal chief. In the event that no person receives a majority of 
the total votes cast, the two candidates receiving the highest number of 
votes shall be paired in a run-off election. This run-off election shall 
be held within thirty (30) days of the initial election. Of these two 
candidates, the one who receives a majority of the total votes cast in 
the run-off election shall be declared the tribal chief.

Sec. 6. The term of office for members of the tribal council shall 

be four (4) years and until their successors are duly elected and seated, 
consistent with Sec. 7 below. 

Sec. 7. In the regular tribal council election of June, 1975, eight 

(8) council representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms and 
eight (8) council representatives shall be elected for two (2) year terms 
to wit:

4 Year Terms

2 Year Terms

Bogue Chitto Community
Conehatta Community
Pearl River Community
Red Water Community
Standing Pine Community
Tucker Community
Bogue Homa Community

1
1
1
2
1
1
1

2
2
2
0
1
1
0
 
 

 
 
 
  For the June, 1975, tribal election, the candidate receiving the 
 most votes in each community will be elected to serve for a 4-year term, 

with the other candidate(s) being elected to serve 2-year term. This 
provision does not apply to the Red Water and Bogue Homa Communities.

Beginning with the regular tribal council election of June, 1977, 

and continuing thereafter, all council representatives shall be elected 
for four (4) year terms. 

Sec. 8. Newly elected members, of the tribal council shall take 

office at the first regular meeting of the council following their 
election.

Sec. 9. The term of office for the tribal chief shall be four 

(4) years and until a successor has been elected and seated.

Sec. 10. At the first regular meeting following each election, 

the tribal council shall elect, from among the membership of the council, 
a vice-chief and a secretary-treasurer with such powers and duties as 
are hereinafter enumerated. These officials shall serve for 2 years or 
until their successors are elected and seated.
 
 

 ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
  Sec. 1. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the tribal council 

and less than one (1) year remains of the term of the member who has 
vacated his position, the tribal chief shall appoint a successor to such 
member, who shall serve until his successor is duly elected and seated 
at the next regular election. The appointee shall claim residence in and 
represent the same community as did the member who vacated his position.

Sec. 2. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the tribal council 

and more than one (1) year remains of the term of the member who has 
vacated his position, the tribal chief shall, within sixty (60) days, 
cause to be held a special election in the community entitled to repre
sentation for the purpose of filling the vacancy.

Sec. 3. If a vacancy occurs in the office of tribal chief and less 

than one (1) year remains of his term of office, the office shall auto
matically be filled by the* vice-chief of the tribal council.

Sec. 4. If a vacancy occurs in the office of tribal chief and more 

than one (1) year remains of his term of office, the tribal council shall, 
within sixty (60) days, cause to be held a special election in which all 
qualified voters of the tribe may participate for the purpose of filling 
vacancy. 

The tribal vice-chief shall serve as tribal chief during the period of 
such vacancy until a new tribal chief is elected and seated.

Sec. 5. If a vacancy occurs in the office of vice-chief or of the 
secretary-treasurer of the tribal council, such a vacancy may be filled 
by the council by election of one of its members to the office.

Sec. 6. Any member of the tribal government (including the tribal 
chief and members of the tribal council) or any employee of the Mississippi 
Band of Choctaw Indians, who, during the term for which he is elected or 
appointed, is convicted of a felony shall be subject to removal from his 
office by action of the tribal council.

 Sec. 7. Any of the seven (7) recognized Choctaw communities repre
sented on the tribal council may petition for the recall of a member it 
has elected by presenting, at least six months prior to the expiration 
of such member’s term of office, a petition signed by at least forty per
cent (40%) of the eligible voters in that community. Within sixty (60) 
days the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election on the 
question of recall. No council member shall be recalled except by the 
affirmative vote of a majority of those voting in an election in which at 
least seventy-five percent (75) of the persons eligible to vote shall have 
voted. Should the recall be approved by the voters. Article VI, Sections 
1 and 2, above, shall apply. 

Sec. 8. The tribal council may remove council officers from office 

for cause by two-thirds vote of the council members at a meeting at which 
a quorum is present, but can neither terminate nor affect their status 
as council members through such action. The tribal council shall pre
scribe the methods by which this removal from office may be carried out.

Sec. 9. The tribal chief may be removed from office if, at least 
six months prior to the expiration of his term, a petition bearing the 
signatures of at least forty percent (40%) of the registered voters in 
the tribe is presented to the tribal council. Within sixty (60) days 
of such presentation, the tribal council shall cause to be held a 
special election on the question of recall. If a majority of those 
voting vote for recall, provisions of Article VI, Section 1 and 2, shall 
apply, provided that at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the eligible 
voters in the tribe shall have voted.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS 

 
 The enrolled members of the seven Choctaw communities shall have the 
right to form local community organizations and adopt their own rules and 
regulations in harmony with this constitution and bylaws. It shall be the
 
 

 
 
 
 
 duty of the councilman from each community to report regularly all the 
actions and decisions of the tribal council to the community organiza
tions.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Sec. 1. The legislative power of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 

Indians is vested in the tribal council and shall be exercised in 
accordance with this constitution and bylaws and the Constitution and 
Laws of the United States applicable to Indian tribes. In addition to 
exercising any other lawful legislative power of the Mississippi Band 
of Choctaw Indians, the tribal council is empowered:

(a) To negotiate with and to approve or disapprove contracts 
or agreements with Federal, State, or local governments, 
with private persons, or with corporate bodies.

(b) To approve or disapprove any sale, disposition, lease 

or encumbrance of tribal lands, interests in land, tribal 
funds, or other tribal assets. 

(c) To establish procedures for the conduct of all tribal 

government and business operations, including the regula
tion of conflict of interest and nepotism.

(d) To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to 
 all appropriation estimates of Federal projects for the 

benefit of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians prior 
to the submission of such estimates to the Office of 
Management and Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To employ and pay legal counsel, subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior so long as such approval
is required by Federal law.

(f)  To appropriate available tribal funds for the benefit of 

the tribe or of any of its communities.

(g)  To approve or disapprove operating budgets upon submission 

by the tribal chief.

(h)  To approve or disapprove all allocations or disbursement 

of tribal funds (or funds under the control of the tribe) 
not specifically appropriated or authorized in a budget 
approved by the tribal council.

(1)  To establish, and enforce rules, consistent with applicable 

Federal statutes and the regulations of the Secretary of 
the Interior, for the management of tribal lands, including, 
but not limited to, the making and revocation of assignments, 
and the disposition of timber, oil, and mineral resources.

(j)  To create, or to provide by ordinance for the creation of 
organizations, including public and private corporations, 
for any lawful purpose, which may be non-profit or profit
making, and to regulate the activities of such organizations 
by ordinance.

(k)  To promote and protect the health, peace, morals, education, 

and general welfare of the tribe and its members.

(1)  To borrow money from any source whatsoever without limit as 
to amount, and, on such terms and conditions and for such 
consideration and periods of time as the tribal council 
shall determine; to use all funds thus obtained to promote 
the welfare -and betterment of the tribe and of its members;
. to finance tribal enterprises; or to lend money thus borrowed.

(m)  To establish and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of 
tribal members; providing for the maintenance of law, order, 
and the administration of justice; regulating wholesale, 
retail, commercial, or industrial activities on tribal lands; 
establishing a tribal court; and defining the powers and 
duties ^f that court; subject to the approval of the

 Secretary of the Interior where such approval is required by 

Federal law. 

(n)  To establish a basic departmental structure for the tribal 

government executive branch.

(o)  To establish policies relating to tribal economic affairs 

and enterprises in accordance with this constitution and 
bylaws.

(p)  To pass any ordinances and resolutions necessary or inci
dental to the exercise of any of the foregoing powers and 
duties.

(q)  To do such acts of a governmental and public nature as are 

not prohibited by applicable laws or by this constitution 
and bylaws.

(r) To levy and collect taxes and raise revenue to meet the 

needs of the tribe or to support tribal government opera
tions.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF

 
 Sec. 1. The tribal chief of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians 

shall have the following executive powers and duties subject to any limita
tion imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United States or 
by this constitution and bylaws:

(a)  To serve as the principal executive officer of the tribe and 
as head of the executive branch of the tribal government.

(b)  To carry out policies established by the tribal council.

(c)  To negotiate contracts or agreements with Federal, State, 

 or local governments, private persons, or corporate bodies 

and to submit them to the tribal council for approval.

(d)  To manage, administer and direct the operation of tribal 

programs, activities, and services and to report to the 
tribal council the status of each program at least 
annually.

(e)  To prepare budgets, budget estimates, and financial reports 
; for submission to or at the direction of the tribal council.

(f)  To provide for the proper receipt, deposit, disbursement, 

and accounting of all funds (or funds under control of the 
tribe) consistent with this constitution and bylaws and such 
policies as may be established by the tribal council.

(g)  To provide for the protection and maintenance of the property, 

equipment, and official records of the tribe.

(h)  To provide for enforcement of the rules, regulations, and 

ordinances enacted by the tribal council.

(i)  To preside over the meetings of the tribal council and to 

vote only in case of a tie.

(j)  To exercise such additional executive powers as are neces
sary or incidental to the performance of the powers and 
duties enumerated above, and which are neither specifically 
denied to the tribal chief herein. 
 
 

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS OF INDIANS

 
 Sec. 1. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, in exercising 

powers of self-government shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of 

religion, or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the 
press, or of the right of the people peaceably to assemble 
and ;to petition for a redress of grievances.

(b) Violate the right of the people to be secure in their 

persons, houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable 
search and seizure, nor issue warrants, but upon probable 
cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched and the person or thing 
to be seized.

(c)  Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in 

jeopardy. 

(d)  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness 

against himself. 

(e)  Take any private property for a public use without just 

compensation. 

(f)  Deny to any person in criminal proceeding the right to a
 speedy and public trial; to be informed of the nature and 

cause of the accusation; to be confronted with the witnesses 
against him; to have compulsory process for obtaining wit
nesses in his favor; and, at his own expense, to have the 
assistance of counsel for his defense.

(g)  Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict 

cruel and unusual punishment, and in no event impose for 
conviction of any one offense any penalty or punishment 
greater than imprisonment for a term of six months or a 
fine of $500, or both.

(h)  Deny to any persons within its jurisdiction the equal pro
tection of its laws or deprive any person of liberty or 
property without due process of law.

(i)  Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law. 

(j) Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by 

imprisonment, the right, upon request, to a trial by jury 
of not less than six persons.

 Sec. 2. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall be 
available to any person, in a court of the United States, to test the 
legality of his detention by order of the tribal court.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Sec. 1. The members of the tribe reserve to themselves the power 
to propose ordinances and resolutions and to enact or reject the same 
at the polls independent of the tribal council, but subject to approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior as required by this constitution and 
bylaws. The members of the tribe also reserve power at their own option 
to approve or reject at the polls any act of the tribal council.

■ Sec. 2. The first power reserved by the members of the tribe is 

the initiative. Thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters shall 
have the right by petition to propose amendments to this constitution 
and bylaws and to propose ordinances and resolutions. 

The second power is the referendum which shall be ordered upon a 

petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters.

Sec. 3. Upon receipt of a request for an election in the form of 

an initiative or referendum petition, the tribal chief shall, after 
ascertaining that a sufficient number of registered voters have signed, 
cause to be held an election on the question or issue within sixty (60) 
days of receipt of said petition; provided, however, that an election 
on a constitutional amendment must be called by the Secretary of the 
Interior as provided in Article XIII. Thirty percent (30%) of the 
registered voters shall constitute a sufficient number of voters under 
this section. 

Sec. 4. Any measures referred to the tribe by the initiative or 

by the referendum shall take effect and be in force when approved by 
a majority of the votes cast in such election in which at least forty 
percent (40%) of the registered voters have voted, except that measures 
requiring approval of the Secretary of the Interior shall not be effective 
until approved by him.

Sec. 5. All measures referred to the tribe for approval or dis

approval by election shall begin with the words: "Be It Enacted by the 
Members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.”

Sec. 6. Referendum or initiative petitions filed under Article XI 

must be submitted under a cover letter signed by at least three (3) 
sponsors who are members the tribe and who are registered to vote in 
tribal elections.

Said cover letter must be signed by the sponsors in the presence of a 
registered notary public, and said petitions must be filed in accordance 
with a procedure to be established by the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - REPEAL AND SAVING CLAUSE

 
 Sec. 1. The constitution and bylaws of the Mississippi Band of 
Choctaw Indians approved May 22, 1945, and revised in November 28, 1969, 
under the provisions of the Act of June 18, 1934, as amended, is hereby 
repealed and superseded by this constitution.

Sec. 2. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the 

Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall remain in full force and effect 
to' the extent that they are consistent with this constitution.

Sec. 3. In the event any sentence, paragraph or section of this 

constitution and bylaws shall be held unconstitutional or invalid by a 
Federal court of competent jurisdiction, the remaining sentences, para
graphs or sections shall remain valid and be presumed consistent with 
the United States Constitution. 
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of 

the qualified voters of the tribe voting at an election called for that 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least forty 
percent (40%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; but 
no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of 
the Interior to call an election on any proposed amendment when requested 
by a sufficient number of qualified voters as provided in Article XI or 
by the tribal council.


BYLAWS OF THE 
MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF TRIBAL COUNCIL OFFICERS


Sec. 1. The vice-chief of the tribal council shall assist the 
tribal chief when called upon to do so by the chief and, in the absence 
of the tribal chief, it shall be his duty and responsibility to preside 
over tribal council meetings.

Sec. 2. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council shall insure 
that an accurate record of all transactions of the council is maintained.

He shall submit promptly, to the Superintendent of the Choctaw Agency, 
copies of the minutes, resolutions adopted, and ordinances passed at 
all regular and special meetings of the tribal council as required by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 3. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council shall cause 
to be audited all tribal funds and accounts at least once each year and 
at such other times as required by the tribal council or by the Secretary 
of the Interior and shall sign and approve all disbursements of tribal 
funds (or funds under control of the tribe); he shall also sign and 
approve all contracts negotiated by the tribal chief on behalf of the 
tribe unless otherwise provided by the tribal council.

Sec. 4. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council, and such 

other officers and employees of the tribe who are responsible for safe
guarding tribal resources, shall be bonded and the cost of such bond 
shall be borne by the tribe. The amount of the bond shall be determined 
by the tribal council as required by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 5. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council, by reason 

of his office, shall preside over such committees as are established by 
the tribal council on budgetary and financial matters.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEETINGS

 
 Sec. 1. The tribal council shall hold regular meetings on the 

second Tuesday in January, April, July, and October of each year. 
Special meetings of the tribal council

(a) may be called by the tribal chief when in his judgment 

they are required.

(b)  shall be called by the tribal chief at the written 
request of at least nine (9) members of the tribal 
council or a majority of the council membership, which
ever is higher.

The business of special meetings shall be limited to the matters spe
cified in the call.

Sec. 2. A majority the members of the tribal council shall

constitute a quorum for the transaction of any tribal business.

Sec. 3. The tribal council in the conduct of its business shall 

be governed by Robert’s Rules of Order.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by 

a majority vote of the enrolled members of the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians voting in a 
special election called for that purpose by the 
Secretary of the Interior and in which at least 
thirty percent (30%) of those persons entitled 
to vote shall have voted, shall be submitted to 
the Secretary of the Interior for his approval. 
The date of such approval shall be the effective 
date of this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Commissioner

of Indian Affairs on October 17 , 1974, the attached Revised Constitution

and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the band and was on Dec. 17 , 1974, duly  rejected adopted

by a vote of 325 for, and 237 against, in an election in which at

least thirty percent of the 1687 entitled to vote cast their

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 

of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935

(49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member
 
 

 
I MORRIS THOMPSON
 
 Approval

Commissioner of Indian Affairs by virtue of the 

authority created to the Secretary of the Interior by 

the Act of Juae 18, 1534 (43 Stat. 5 54), as amended, 

and delegated to so by 239 Dm 1.1, do hereby approve 

the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi 

Band of Choctaw Indians, duly adopted by the qualified 

voters on December 17, 1974

s/ MORRIS THOMPSON

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Dates March 28 1975

