 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

OF THE 

CHOCTAW NATION OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, invoking the will and 
guidance of Almighty God in order to promote the general welfare, to insure 
tranquillity and to secure to ourselves and our posterity the blessings of our 
ancestral heritage, culture and tribal sovereignty, do hereby ordain and 
establish this Constitution for the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - NAME AND GEOGRAPHICAL AREA

 
 Section 1. The name of this body shall be ’’The Choctaw Nation of 
Oklahoma."

Where in this Constitution the term "Choctaw Nation" or
Sec. 2. 
"the Nation" is used to denote a geographical area, it shall mean the 
following areas in the State of Oklahoma: McCurtain County, LeFlore 
County, Haskell County, Latimer County, Pushmataha County, Choctaw 
County, Bryan County, Atoka County, Pittsburg County, Coal County and 
that part of Hughes County south of the Canadian River.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEMBERSHIP 

 
 Section 1. The Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma shall consist of all 
Choctaw Indians by blood whose names appear on the final rolls of the 
Choctaw Nation approved pursuant to Section 2 of the Act of April 26, 1906 
(34 Stat. 136) and their lineal descendants.

Except as hereinafter provided, any Choctaw by blood who
Sec. 2. 
has elected or shall hereafter elect to become a member of any other tribe 
or band of Indians may not be a member of this Nation.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council shall have the power to adopt any 
Choctaw by blood as a member of the Choctaw Nation who is or has become 
a member of any other tribe or band of Indians and who applies for 
membership in the Choctaw Nation; provided, the applicant denounces his 
membership in such other tribe or band of Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE III - RIGHT OF SUFFERAGE

 
 Section 1. All members eighteen (18) years of age and over shall be 
deemed qualified electors under the authority of this Constitution; provided, 
they are duly registered to vote. 

Sec. 2. 
a citizen or member of another tribe shall be eligible to vote in elections of 
the Choctaw Nation.

No enrolled member of another tribe or person who votes as

In all tribal elections by the people, the vote shall be by
Sec. 3. 
secret ballot. The Tribal Council shall provide the kind of ballot to be used 
and make all such other regulations as may be necessary to detect and 
punish fraud and preserve the purity of the ballot and shall provide for the 
registration of electors.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. Nothing in this Constitution shall be interpreted in a way 
which would diminish the rights and privileges that tribal members have as 
citizens of this Nation, the State of Oklahoma, the United States of 
America or under any Act of the Congress of the United States.

Sec. 2. 
any office of public trust in this Nation.

No religious test shall ever be required as a qualification to

The right that every member has to speak, write or publish
Sec. 3. 
his opinions on matters relating to the Choctaw Nation shall never be 
abridged.

The members shall have the right, in a peaceable manner, to
Sec. 4. 
assemble together for their common good, and to apply to those vested with 
powers of government for redress of grievances or other purposes by address 
or remonstrance.

The individually vested property rights of members of the
Sec. 5. 
Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma shall not be affected in anyway whatsoever by 
the provisions of this Constitution or any enactment of the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - DIVISION OF THE POWERS OF GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. The powers of the government of the Choctaw Nation shall 
be divided into three (3) distinct departments: Executive, Legislative and

Judicial. No person or collection of persons, being one of those depart
ments, shall exercise any power properly attached to either of the others; 
provided, that the exercise of such powers shall be subject to any limitations 
imposed by this Constitution and Federal Law.

Sec. 2. 
officials, Assistant Chief and members of the Judicial Department.

The officers of the Nation are to include all elective
 
 

ARTICLE VI - EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 Section 1. The supreme executive power of this Nation shall be vested 
in a chief magistrate, who shall be styled "The Chief of the Choctaw 
Nation."

Sec. 2. 
and perform all duties as assigned to him by the Chief.

There shall be an Assistant Chief who shall assist the Chief

Any member of the Choctaw Nation who is at least thirty
Sec. 3. 
(30)  years of age and who possesses no less than one-quarter (1/4) degree of 
Choctaw Indian blood is eligible to become a candidate for the office of 
Chief or Assistant Chief.

Sec. 4. 
The Chief and the Assistant Chief must have been residents
of the Choctaw Nation for two (2) years or more immediately preceding any 
election for Chief and must remain residents of the Choctaw Nation during 
the tenure of their office.

No person who has been convicted of a felony by a court of
Sec. 5. 
competent jurisdiction shall be eligible to hold any elective or appointive 
office in the Choctaw Nation.

The Chief shall be elected for a term of four (4) years which
Sec. 6. 
shall commence at twelve (12) o’clock noon on the first Monday in 
September of 1979 and thereafter the terms shall commence at twelve (12) 
o’clock noon on the first Monday of September of every quadrennium and 
shall serve until his successor has been elected and installed.

The Assistant Chief shall be appointed by the Chief with the
Sec. 7. 
advice and consent of the Tribal Council and may be removed at the 
discretion of the Chief.
 
 

I

ARTICLE VII - PRIVILEGES, DUTIES AND POWERS OF EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 Section 1. The Chief shall perform all duties appertaining to the office 
of Chief Executive. He shall sign official papers on behalf of the Nation.

The Chief shall have power to establish and appoint commit
Sec. 2. 
tees, members and delegates to represent the Choctaw Nation with the 
advice and consent of the Tribal Council. All appointments requiring 
confirmation shall be presented to the Council within thirty (30) days of the 
appointment.

The Chief shall fix and prescribe salaries and allowances for
Sec. 3. 
all elected or appointed officials and employees of the Choctaw Nation 
except the members of the Tribal Council and Tribal Court.

The Chief shall have the power to veto any legislative act,
Sec. 4. 
rule or regulation of the Tribal Council and must do so within five (5) 
working days after passage.

The Chief shall prepare an annual tribal budget which shall
Sec. 5. 
be submitted to the Tribal Council at least thirty (30) days prior to the 
beginning of the tribal fiscal year.

The Chief shall manage, administer and direct the operation
Sec. 6. 
of tribal programs, activities and services and report to the Tribal Council 
quarterly.

The Assistant Chief shall serve in the absence of the Chief
Sec. 7. 
and when serving shall have all the privileges, duties and powers of the 
Chief.

The Chief shall have the power to remove any official
Sec. 8. 
appointed by him except for members of the Tribal Court and the Tribal 
Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 Section 1. The legislative authority of the Choctaw Nation shall be 
vested in the Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. 
The Tribal Council shall consist of fifteen (15) members, one
(1) to be elected from each of the following twelve (12) districts and three 
(3) members to be elected at large from the area outside the territorial 
boundaries of the Choctaw Nation; provided, that the Tribal Council shall 
have the responsibility for reapportionment based on population when 
necessary. However, the at-large seats shall never exceed one-fifth (1/5) 
of the total number of seats on the Tribal Council.

District Number 

 Area embraced within each District

1 

2 

3 

4 

5 

6 

7 

8 

9 

10 

11 

12 

McCurtain County south of the north
line of Township Six (6) South as  
established by the United States 
Geological Survey.

 McCurtain County north of the north

line of Township Six (6) South as
established by the United States 
Geological Survey.

LeFlore County south of the north
line of Township Four (4) North as
established by the United States

 Geological Survey.

LeFlore County north of the north
line of Township Four (4) North as 
established by the United States 
Geological Survey.

Haskell County

Latimer County

Pushmataha County

Choctaw County

Bryan County

Atoka County

Pittsburg County

Coal County and that part of
Hughes County South of the 
Canadian River

The at-large posts shall be identified as "at-large seat number one,” "at- 
large seat number two" and "at-large seat number three."

Sec. 3. 
Members of the Tribal Council who are elected from
districts within the Choctaw Nation must be members of the Nation and 
must have resided in their respective districts for one (1) year immediately
 
 

 
 
 
 
 preceding the election. They must remain residents of the district from 
which they were elected during the tenure of their office. The at-large 
members must be members of the Nation and must have resided outside of 
the Choctaw Nation for one (1) year immediately preceding the election. 
The at-large members shall be elected from the tribal members residing 
outside of the Choctaw Nation. Candidates for the Tribal Council must be 
at least one-fourth (1/4) Choctaw Indian by blood and must be twenty-one (21) 
years of age or older at the time they file for election.

Sec. 4. Except as provided in the following section, members of the 
Tribal Council shall be elected for a term of four (4) years commencing at 
twelve (12) o'clock noon on the first Monday of the first September 
following the adoption of this Constitution.

At the hour of ten (10) o'clock a. m. on Friday following the
Sec. 5. 
fourth Saturday of the first August following the adoption of this Constitu
tion, the successful candidates for Tribal Council shall meet with the 
elected Chief at the Capital at Tuskahoma at which time and place the 
elected Chief will place fifteen (15) slips of paper in a receptacle, eight (8) 
of which will have the number four (4) on them and seven (7) will have the 
number two (2) written on them. Each slip will be folded so that the number 
thereon cannot be seen. In the presence of each other and the elected 
Chief, each successful candidate shall draw one (1) of the slips from the 
receptacle and the number on the slip each of the successful candidates 
draws will be the number of years he shall serve during the first term.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - PRIVILEGES, DUTIES AND POWERS OF LEGISLATIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 Section L The Tribal Council, at its first regular session each year, 
shall organize and elect officers from its membership. Officers to be elected 
are a Speaker, a Secretary and such other officers as the Council shall deem 
necessary. A recording secretary and a sergeant-at-arms who are not 
members of the Tribal Council shall be appointed by the Speaker.

Sec. 2. 
Council.

The Speaker shall preside over all meetings of the Tribal

The Secretary of the Tribal Council shall maintain all
Sec. 3. 
records and enactments of the Tribal Council. They shall be available for 
inspection by tribal members during normal office hours. All such docu
ments shall remain the property of the Choctaw Nation.

The Tribal Council shall enact legislation, rules and regula
Sec. 4. 
tions not inconsistent with this Constitution for the administration and 
regulation of the affairs of the Choctaw Nation.

The Tribal Council shall prescribe election procedures and
Sec. 5. 
regulations for tribal elections. The Council shall create an election board 
whose members shall be appointed by the Chief with the advice and consent 
of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 6. The Tribal Council shall make decisions pertaining to the 
acquisition, leasing, disposition and management of tribal property.

Sec. 7. 
impeachment.

The Tribal Council shall sit as a court in all cases of

The Tribal Council shall be responsible for approving the
Sec. 8. 
annual tribal budget and shall prescribe salaries and allowances for members 
of the Tribal Council and the Tribal Court.

Sec. 9. 
unless approved by at least eight (8) members of the Tribal Council.

No legislation, rule or regulation shall be implemented

Sec. 10. .The Tribal Council shall have power to override the Chief's 
veto of any of its actions by at least ten (10) members voting in favor of 
overriding the veto.

Sec. 11. The Council shall act upon all appointments requiring its 
confirmation within thirty (30) days or less after such appointment is 
presented for confirmation. The appointment shall become effective 
without confirmation should the Council fail to so act.

Sec. 12. The selection of legal counsel shall be made by the Chief 
and approved by the Tribal Council and the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE X - SESSIONS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Regular sessions of the Tribal Council shall be held on the 
second Saturday of each month at ten (10) o'clock a. m. at the Choctaw 
Nation Council House at Tuskahoma, Oklahoma, unless and until otherwise 
provided by the Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. 

Ten (10) members must be present to constitute a quorum.

The Chief may call a special session of the Council at any
Sec. 3. 
time he deems necessary by notifying each member by the most expedient 
way, at least twenty-four (24) hours in advance of the meeting. Inability to 
notify all members after reasonable efforts shall not prevent such special 
session from occurring provided a quorum is present. The Chief shall call a 

special session upon receipt of a letter signed by at least eight (8) members 
of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 4. 
AU regular and special sessions shall be open to the
membership of the Nation. However, except for the Chief or his represen
tative and in cases of impeachment, no person shall address the Council 
unless he or she has the unanimous approval of the Council members 
present. The Council may meet in executive session upon an affirmative 
vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Tribal Council members present. All votes on 
any matter shall be in open session and shall be a matter of public record.

Sec. 5. 
Council voted shall be recorded in the minutes of the Tribal Council.

Roll call votes showing how each member of the Tribal

Sec. 6. Robert’s Rules of Order shall be followed in conducting 
Tribal Council business to the extent they do not conflict with this 
Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - ORDER OF BUSINESS

 
 The order of business at any regular or special session of the Tribal Council 
shall be as follows:

1.  Call to order

2.  Roll call and prayer

3.  Reading of minutes of last session

4.  Unfinished business

5.  Reports of Committees

6.  New business (Comments from Members)

7.  Prayer and adjournment

Provided; however, this order of business may be suspended by the Tribal 
Council for any meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

 
 Section 1.

The judicial authority of the Choctaw Nation shall be vested

In a Tribal Court which shall consist of a three (3)-member Court appointed 
by the Chief with the advice and consent of the Tribal Council. One (1) such 
member shall be a lawyer duly licensed to practice before the Supreme 
Court of Oklahoma. Two (2) members shall be non-lawyers. The member 
who is a lawyer shall be the presiding judge of the Court.

Sec. 2. 
the Choctaw Nation and must remain residents of the Choctaw Nation 
during the tenure of their office. The non-lawyer members must be 

Members of the Judicial Department must be residents of

 qualified electors of the Choctaw Nation.

Tribal Court members shall be appointed for a term of three
Sec. 3. 
(3)  years; provided that initially one (1) non-lawyer member shall be 
appointed for one (1) year, one (1) non-lawyer member shall be appointed for 
two (2) years and the lawyer member for three (3) years to establish 
staggered terms of office.

Sec. 4. 
Article XV, Section 1.

Judges shall not be subject to removal except as provided in

Sec. 5. 
by the Tribal Court shall be recorded in journals kept for that purpose.

Decisions finally determining each cause of action decided
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - PRIVILEGES, DUTIES AND POWERS OF JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

 
 Section 1. The Tribal Court shall have exclusive jurisdiction to decide 
disputes, by vote of two (2) members, arising under any provision of this 
Constitution or any rule or regulation enacted by the Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. 
by the Tribal Council and shall insure the members due process of law.

Rules of procedure for the Tribal Court shall be prescribed

Sec. 3. 

The decision of the Tribal Court shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV- FILLING VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. In case of the death, resignation or removal of the Chief, 
the Assistant Chief shall immediately become Chief for the remainder of 
the unexpired term. In the event the Assistant Chief shall succeed to the 
office of Chief, he shall appoint a successor Assistant Chief with the advice 
and consent of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. 
vacancy occurs in the Tribal Council to fill such vacancy for the remainder

The Chief shall have power within sixty (60) days after a

of the unexpired term. Such appointee shall meet the same qualifications as 
 required of a candidate for election to such office. If a vacancy occurs 
more than one (1) year before the expiration of such term, a special election 
shall be called to fill the vacancy.
 
 

 ARTICLE XV - REMOVAL OF OFFICIALS

 
 Section 1. Impeachment.

Any elected or appointed officer shall be subject to 
(a) 
impeachment for willful neglect of duty, corruption in office, 
habitual drunkenness, incompetency, incapability of performing 
his duties or committing any offense involving moral turpitude 

’ while in office.

Impeachment charges shall be presented to the Judicial 
(b) 
Department. The Tribal Court shall within thirty (30) days 
examine the evidence. If the Tribal Court determines the 
evidence or charges are sufficient to warrant further action, it  
shall conduct a hearing pursuant to this Article. If impeachment 
charges are brought against any judge, then that judge shall be 
disqualified to sit on any matters relating to such charges. Then, 
and in such event, the Chief shall name a substitute judge, with 
the advice and consent of the Tribal Council, who shall sit as a 
member of the Court on all matters relating to such impeach
ment charges.

The Tribal Council shall prescribe such rules and proce
(c) 
dures that are necessary to carry into effect the provisions of 
this Article.

Any officer against whom charges may be preferred shall 
(d) 
be entitled to a hearing, by the Tribal Court, under rules and 
procedures prescribed by the Tribal Council.

Any officer against whom articles of impeachment are 
(e) 
referred to the Tribal Council shall be suspended from the 
exercise of the duties of his office during the pendency of his 
impeachment.

(f) 
and its decision shall be final.

The Tribal Council shall sit as a court of impeachment 

(g) 

Ten (10) votes shall be required to impeach the official.

Judgment in cases of impeachment shall extend not only 
(h) 
to removal from office but also to disqualification from holding 
any office of honor, trust or profit under this Nation.

Sec. 2. 

Recall.

Upon receipt of a valid petition, submitted to the Judicial 
(a) 
Department, signed by at least forty percent (40%) of the
 registered voters of the district or area in which the officer was 
elected, it shall be the duty of the Tribal Council to call and 
conduct, within sixty (60) days, a recall election.

The election shall be conducted pursuant to rules and 
(b) 
regulations prescribed by the Tribal Council. Recall from office 
shall require a supporting vote of at least fifty-one percent 
(51%) of the registered voters of the district or area in which the 
election is conducted.

(c) 
given recall election.

Only one (1) official shall be subject for recall at any 

(d) 
time during his office.

No official shall be subject to recall more than one (1) 
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. The members shall have the right to propose any legislative 
measure by a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
registered voters. Every such petition shall contain the entire text of the 
measure proposed. The petition shall be filed with the Chief at least sixty 
(60) days prior to the next election for Chief at which time it shall appear 
on the ballot. If such petition is filed more than one (1) year prior to the 
next election for Chief, a special election shall be called. If approved by a 
majority of those participating in the election, it shall be in full force and 
effect immediately.

The Tribal Council, by approval of at least ten (10)
Sec. 2. 
members, may refer any legislative measure to the members of the Choctaw 
Nation by directing that said measure be placed on the ballot at the next 
election for Chief or by calling for a special election. Decisions to refer 
any matter to the people shall be made at least sixty (60) days prior to the 
election at which it is presented.

Sec. 3. AU petitions for initiative shall be submitted under a cover 
letter signed by at least three (3) sponsors who are qualified electors of the 
Choctaw Nation.
 
 

 ARTICLE XVII - OATH OF OFFICE

 
 All elected or appointed officials shall take the following oath:

"I, _________________________________, do solemnly swear 

(or affirm) that I will support, obey and defend the Constitution of the 

Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma, the State of Oklahoma, and the United States 

of America and will discharge the duties of my office with fidelity.

I further swear (or affirm) that I will devote my best efforts toward 

the preservation of the heritage and tradition of the Choctaw Nation in 

order that aU mankind may better understand, evaluate, and appreciate the 

history of its glorious past and enjoy its brilliant future, so help me God.”
 
 

 ARTICLE XVIII - AMENDMENT

 
 Section I. Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by the 
Tribal Council and shall require at least ten (10) affirmative votes or by a 
petition containing the entire text of the amendment and signed by not less 
than thirty percent (30%) of the total number of qualified voters voting in 
the last Chief's election.

Approval of not less than fifty-one (51%) of the total
Sec. 2. 
number of qualified voters of the Nation voting in the last Chief's election 
shall be required to amend this Constitution. Amendments shall be 
effective upon approval by the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - EFFECTIVE DATE

 
 This Constitution shall become effective when approved by the Secretary of 
the Interior and ratified by the voters.
 
 

 
GENERAL PROVISION

 
 Pursuant to this Constitution, the initial election of the Chief and members 
of the Tribal Council shall occur at the next regular election for Chief. The 
Secretary of the Interior shall approve rules and regulations developed by a 
tribal committee appointed by the Chief to conduct the first election for 
electing the Chief and members of the Tribal Council
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to the March 21, 1979  , approval letter signed by the Acting

Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the foregoing Constitution of the 

Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma was submitted for ratification to the qualified 

-voters of the Choctaw Nation and was on May 17, 1979, duly ratified 

(date)

by a vote of 1,528 

for, and 1,226 against, in an election in which

a majority of the 5,897* qualified voters cast their ballots in accord

(number) 

ance with Section 3 of the Act of June 26, 1936, 49 Stat. 1967.

*2,833 ballots not received and 310 ballots received were invalid.

Date:

May 18, 1979
 
 

APPROVAL 

 
 I,Martin E. Seneca, Jr., Acting Deputy Commissioner . 

of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 

Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 26, 1936, 49 Stat. 1967, as 

amended and delegated to me by 230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve the 

Constitution of the Choctaw Nation of Oklahoma subject to ratification by 

the voters; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under the Constitution that would be contrary to

Federal Law.

Washington, D. C.

Date: 

21, 1975

