 
  
 MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 As Approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs March 28, 1975, 
As Amended and Approved, May 3, 2006

CONSTITUTION OF THE MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS...10
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS 

 
 PREAMBLE ................................    ......10

ARTICLE I - NAME .....................................        10

ARTICLE II - JURISDICTION .........................  10

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP ................................................................................10

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY......................................................... ........ 11

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS ................  ........11

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE .............. 13

ARTICLE VII - COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS............ ...... . ...................14 

ARTICLE VII - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL .14

ARTICLE IX - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF ............................. 16

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS OF INDIANS.................................................................. 17

ARTICLE XI - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM .............................  18

ARTICLE XII - REPEAL AND SAVING CLAUSE .........................................19

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS ....................  19

BYLAWS OF THE MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS ...................19

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL OFFICERS................ 19 

ARTICLE II - MEETINGS .........   20

ARTICLE III - ADOPTION ...................................................................................20
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Choctaw Indians, members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, desiring 
to promote the achievement of self-government for the Choctaw people do, for our 
welfare and benefit, hereby adopt and proclaim the following constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I-NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians and may 
hereinafter be referred to as “the tribe.”
 
 

ARTICLE II - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall extend to all lands now 
held or which may hereafter be acquired by or for or which may be used under proper 
authority by the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, and to all persons who are now or 
may hereafter become members of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Sec. 1. The membership of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall consist of:

(a) 

All Choctaw Indians of one-half (1/2) or more Choctaw blood, resident in 
Mississippi, January 1, 1940, as shown by the census roll maintained by 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs at the Choctaw Agency, provided that the 
tribal council shall have the power to revise said rolls, with the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior at any time.

(b)  Any child of one-half (1/2) or more Choctaw blood bom to any enrolled
member of the band after January 1, 1940, shall be entitled to 
membership.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall have the power to pass ordinances, subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior, governing future membership, loss of membership, and 
the adoption of new members; provided that no person of less than one-half degree of 
Choctaw blood shall be admitted to membership in the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 

 Indians. 
 
 

ARTICLE IV-GOVERNING BODY

 
 Sec. 1. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall be governed by a tribal council 
and a tribal chief whose powers are enumerated in Articles VIII and IX herein.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall consist of elected representatives from the eight (8) 
recognized Choctaw communities. Each community shall be entitled to representation on 
the tribal council according to population as is hereinafter provided:

Bogue Chitto Community 3
Conehatta Community 3
Pearl River Community 3 
Red Water Community 2
Standing Pine Community 2
Tucker Community 2
Bogue Homa Community 1
Crystal Ridge Community 1

Sec. 3. The tribal chief shall be elected by the Choctaw people at large with each 
registered voter entitled to one vote.

Sec. 4. The tribal council shall have authority to make changes in the number of 
representatives from each community according to future community needs, community 
population changes or applicable Federal law, subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior.

Sec. 5. In order to qualify for and seek election to a seat on the tribal council, a person 
must:

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 

be an enrolled member of the tribe.
claim residence by registration in the community which he intends to 
represent.
be at least 21 years of age.

Sec. 6. In order to qualify for and seek election to the office of tribal chief, a person 
must:

(a) 
(b) 

be an enrolled member of the tribe.
be at least 30 years of age prior to the date of election.
 
 

ARTICLE V-ELECTIONS

 
 Sec. 1. Any member of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, whether male or 
female, who is eighteen (18) years of age or more and registered according to rules set 
forth by the tribal council, shall be entitled to vote in any tribal election.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall prescribe rules and regulations to govern the conduct of 
tribal elections consistent with this constitution and bylaws. All elections shall be by 
secret ballot.

Sec. 3. The first regular election under this revised constitution and bylaws shall take 
place in June 1975. Subsequent thereto, regular elections shall be held in June of odd- 
numbered years. The present tribal council representatives shall remain in office until 
their successors are duly elected and seated.

Sec. 4. In all tribal council elections, the person receiving the largest number of votes for 
a given position shall be declared elected.

Sec. 5. For the election of the tribal chief, the person receiving a majority of the total 
votes cast for all candidates shall be declared the tribal chief. In the event that no person 
receives a majority of the total votes cast, the two candidates receiving the highest 
number of votes shall be paired in a run-off election. This run-off election shall be held 
within thirty (30) days of the initial election. Of these two candidates, the one who 
receives a majority of the total votes cast in the run-off election shall be declared the 
tribal chief.

Sec. 6. The term of office for members of the tribal council shall be four (4) years and 
until their successors are duly elected and seated, consistent with Sec. 7 below.

Sec. 7. In the regular tribal council election of June, 1975, eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms and eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for two (2) year terms, to wit:

Bogue Chitto Community
Conehatta Community
Pearl River Community
Red Water Community
Standing Pine Community
Tucker Community
Bogue Homa Community

4 Year Terms
1
1
1
2
1
1
1

2 Year Terms
2
2
2
0
1
1
0

For the June, 1975, tribal election, the candidate receiving the most votes in each 
community will be elected to serve for a 4-year term, with the other candidate(s) being 
elected to serve 2-year term. This provision does not apply to the Red Water and Bogue 
Homa Communities.

Beginning with the regular tribal council election of June, 1977, and continuing 
thereafter, all council representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms.

Upon approval of this paragraph by the Secretary of the Interior, a special election shall 
be held for the elected representative from the Crystal Ridge Community. Thereafter, 

regular elections for the Crystal Ridge representative shall be held in election years in 
which there is not a regular election for tire election of tribal chief.

Sec. 8. Newly elected members of the tribal council shall take office at the first regular 
meeting of the council following their election.

Sec. 9. The term of office for the tribal chief shall be four (4) years and until a successor 
has been elected and seated.

Sec. 10. At the first regular meeting following each election, the tribal council shall 
elect, from among the membership of the council, a vice-chief and a secretary-treasurer 
with such powers and duties as are hereinafter enumerated. These officials shall serve for 
2 years or until their successors are elected and seated.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Sec. 1. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the tribal council and less than one (1) 
year remains of the term of the member who has vacated his position, the tribal chief 
shall appoint a successor to such member, who shall serve until his successor is duly 
elected and seated at the next regular election. The appointee shall claim residence in and 
represent the same community as did the member who vacated his position.

Sec. 2. If a vacancy occurs in the membership of the tribal council and more than one (1) 
year remains of the term of the member who has vacated his position, the tribal chief 
shall, within sixty (60) days, cause to be held a special election in the community entitled 
to representation for the purpose of filling the vacancy.

Sec. 3. If a vacancy occurs in the office of tribal chief and less than one (1) year remains 
of his term of office, the office shall automatically be filled by the vice-chief of the tribal 
council.

Sec. 4. If a vacancy occurs in the office of tribal chief and more than one (1) year 
remains of his term of office, the tribal council shall, within sixty (60) days, cause to be 
held a special election in which all qualified voters of the tribe may participate for the 
purpose of filling vacancy. The Tribal vice-chief shall serve as tribal chief during the 
period of such vacancy until a new tribal chief is elected and seated.

Sec. 5. If a vacancy occurs in the office of vice-chief or of the secretary-treasurer of the 
tribal council, such a vacancy may be filled by the council by election of one of its 
members to the office. 

Sec. 6. Any member of the tribal government (including the tribal chief and members of 
the tribal council) or any employee of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, who 
during the term for which he is elected or appointed, is convicted of a felony shall be 
subject to removal from his office by action of the tribal council.

Sec. 7.. Any of the eight (8) recognized Choctaw communities represented on the tribal 
council may petition for the recall of a member it has elected by presenting, at least six 
months prior to the expiration of such member’s term of office, a petition signed by at 
least forty percent (40%) of the eligible voters in that community. Within sixty (60) days 
the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election on the question of recall. No 
council member shall be recalled except by the affirmative vote of a majority of those 
voting in an election in which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the persons eligible 
to vote shall have voted. Should the recall be approved by the voters, Article VI, 
Sections 1 and 2, above, shall apply.

Sec. 8. The tribal council may remove council officers from office for cause by two- 
thirds (2/3) vote of the council members at a meeting at which a quorum is present, but 
can neither terminate nor affect their status as council members through such action. The 
tribal council shall prescribe the methods by which this removal from office may be 
carried out.

Sec. 9. The tribal chief may be removed from office if, at lease six months prior to the 
expiration of his term, a petition bearing the signatures of at least forty percent (40%) of 
the registered voters in the tribe is presented to the tribal council. Within sixty (60) days 
of such presentation, the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election on the 
question of recall. If a majority of those voting vote for recall, provisions of Article VI, 
Section 1 and 2, shall apply, provided that at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the 
eligible voters in the tribe shall have voted.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS

 
 The enrolled members of the eight Choctaw communities shall have the right to form 
local community organizations and adopt their own rules and regulations in harmony 
with this constitution and bylaws. It shall be the duty of the councilman from each 
community to report regularly all the actions and decisions of the tribal council to the 
community organizations.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Sec. 1. The legislative power of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians is vested in the 
tribal council and shall be exercised in accordance with this constitution and bylaws and 
the Constitution and Laws of the United States applicable to Indian tribes. In addition to 
exercising any other lawful legislative power of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw 
Indians, the tribal council is empowered:

(a) 

To negotiate with and to approve or disapprove contracts or agreements 
with Federal, State, or local governments, with private persons, or with 
corporate bodies.

(b) 

To approve or disapprove any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of 
tribal lands, interests in land, tribal funds, or other tribal assets.

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

(k) 

(1) 

To establish procedures for the conduct of all tribal government and 
business operations, including the regulation of conflict of interest and 
nepotism. 

To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation 
estimates of Federal projects for the benefit of the Mississippi Band of 
Choctaw Indians prior to tire submission of such estimates to the Office of 
Management and Budget and to Congress.

To employ and pay legal counsel, subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior so long as such approval is required by Federal law.

To appropriate available tribal funds for the benefit of the tribe or of any 
of its communities. 

To approve or disapprove operating budgets upon submission by the tribal 
chief.

To approve or disapprove all allocations or disbursement of tribal funds 
(or funds under the control of the tribe) not specifically appropriated or 
authorized in a budget approved by the tribal council.

To establish and enforce rules, consistent with applicable Federal statutes 
and the regulations of the Secretary of the Interior, for the management of 
tribal lands, including, but not limited to, the making and revocation of 
assignments, and the disposition of timber, oil, and mineral resources.

To create, or to provide by ordinance for the creation of organizations, 
including public and private corporations, for any lawful purpose, which 
may be non-profit or profit-making, and to regulate the activities of such 
organizations by ordinance. 

To promote and protect the health, peace, morals, education, and general 
welfare of the tribe audits members. 

To borrow money from any source whatsoever without limit as to amount, 
and on such terms and conditions and for such consideration and periods 
of time as the tribal council shall determine; to use all funds thus obtained 
to promote the welfare and betterment of the tribe and of its members; to 
finance tribal enterprises; or to lend money thus borrowed.

(m) 

To establish and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of tribal 
members; providing for the maintenance of law, order and the 
administration of justice; regulating wholesale, retail, commercial, or 
industrial activities on tribal lands; establishing a tribal court; and defining 

the powers and duties of that court; subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior where such approval is required by Federal law.

To establish a basic departmental structure for the tribal government 
executive branch.

To establish policies relating to tribal economic affairs and enterprises in 
accordance with this constitution and bylaws.

To pass any ordinances and resolutions necessary or incidental to the 
exercise of any of the foregoing powers and duties.

To do such acts of a governmental and public nature as are not prohibited
by applicable laws or by this constitution and bylaws.

To levy and collect taxes and raise revenue to meet the needs of the tribe 
or to support tribal government operations.

(n) 

(o) 

(p) 

(q) 

(r) 
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE CHIEF

 
 Sec. 1. The tribal chief of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians shall have the 
following executive powers and duties subject to any limitation imposed by the statutes 
or the Constitution of the United States or by this constitution and bylaws:

(a) 

To serve as the principal executive officer of the tribe and as head of the 
executive branch of the tribal government.

(b) 

To carry out policies established by the tribal council.

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

To negotiate contracts or agreements with Federal, State, or local 
governments, private persons, or corporate bodies and to submit them to 
the tribal council for approval.

To manage, administer and direct the operation of the tribal programs, 
activities, and services and to report to the tribal council the status of each 
program at least annually.

To prepare budgets, budget estimates, and financial reports for submission 
to or at the direction of the tribal council.

To provide for the proper receipt, deposit, disbursement, and accounting 
of all funds (or funds under control of the tribe) consistent with this 
constitution and bylaws and such policies as may be established by the 
tribal council.

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

To provide for the protection and maintenance of the property, equipment, 
and official records of the tribe.

To provide for enforcement of the rules, regulations, and ordinances 
enacted by the tribal council.

To preside over the meeting of the tribal council and to vote only in case 
of a tie.

To exercise such additional executive powers as are necessary or 
incidental to the performance of the powers and duties enumerated above, 
and which are neither specifically denied to the tribal chief herein.
 
 

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS OF INDIANS

 
 Sec. 1. The Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians, in exercising powers of self
government shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or of the right of the 
people peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances.

(b) 

Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, 
papers, and effects against unreasonable search and seizure, nor issue 
warrants, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and 
particularly describing the place to be searched and the person or thing to 
be seized.

(c) 

Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy.

(d) 

Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself.

(e) 

Take any private property for a public use without just compensation.

(f) 

(g) 

Deny to any person in criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public 
trial; to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation; to be 
confronted with the witnesses against him; to have compulsory process for 
obtaining witnesses in his favor; and, at his own expense, to have the 
assistance of counsel for his defense.

Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual 
punishment, and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense any 
penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of six months 
or a fine of $500, or both.

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

Deny to any persons within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws
or deprive any person of liberty or property without due process of law.

Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law,

Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment, 
the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than six persons.

Sec, 2. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall be available to any person, in a 
court of the United States, to test the legality of his detention by order of the tribal court.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Sec. 1. The members of the tribe reserve to themselves the power to propose ordinances 
and resolutions and to enact or reject the same at the polls independent of the tribal 
council, but subject to approval of the Secretary of the Interior as required by this 
constitution and bylaws. The members of the tribe also reserve power at their own option 
to approve or reject at the polls any act of the tribal council.

Sec. 2. The first power reserved by the members of the tribe is the initiative. Thirty 
percent (30%) of the registered voters shall have the right by petition to propose 
amendments to this constitution and bylaws and to propose ordinances and resolutions. 
The second power is the referendum which shall be ordered upon a petition signed by 
thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters.

Sec. 3. Upon receipt of a request for an election in the form of an initiative or 
referendum petition, the tribal chief shall, after ascertaining that a sufficient number of 
registered voters have signed, cause to be held an election on the question or issue within 
sixty (60) days of receipt of said petition; provided, however, that an election on a 
constitutional amendment must be called by the Secretary of the Interior as provided in 
Article XIII. Thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters shall constitute a sufficient 
number of voters under this section. 

Sec. 4. Any measures referred to the tribe, by the. initiative or by the referendum shall 
take effect and be in force when approval by a majority of the votes cast in such election 
in which at least forty percent (40%) of the registered voters have voted, except that 
measures requiring approval of the Secretary of the Interior shall not be effective until 
approved by him.

Sec. 5. All measures referred to the tribe for approval or disapproval by election shall 
begin with the words; “Be It Enacted by the Members of the Mississippi Band of 
Choctaw Indians.”

Sec. 6. Referendum or initiative petitions filed under Article XI must be submitted under 
a cover letter signed by at least three (3) sponsors who are members of the tribe and who 
are registered to vote in tribal elections. Said cover letter must be signed by the sponsors 

in the presence of a registered notary public and said petitions must be filed in 
accordance with a procedure to be established by the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - REPEAL AND SAVING CLAUSE

 
 Sec. 1. The constitution and bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians 
approved May 22, 1945, and revised in November 28, 1969, and in March 28,1975, 
under the provisions of the Act of June 18,1934, as amended, is hereby repealed and 
superseded by this constitution.

Sec. 2. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the Mississippi Band of 
Choctaw Indians shall remain in full force and effect to the extent that they are consistent 
with this constitution.

. Sec. 3. In the event any sentence, paragraph or section of this constitution and bylaws  
shall be held unconstitutional or invalid by a Federal court of competent jurisdiction, the 
remaining sentences, paragraphs'or sections shall remain valid and be presumed 
consistent with the United States Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters 
of the tribe voting at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least forty percent (40%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 
election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment when requested by a sufficient number of qualified 
voters as provided in Article XI or by the tribal council.


BYLAWS OF THE 
MISSISSIPPI BAND OF CHOCTAW INDIANS

ARTICLE I  - DUTIES OF TRIBAL COUNCIL OFFICERS


Sec. 1. The vice-chief of the tribal council shall assist the tribal chief when called upon 
to do so by the chief and, in the absence of the tribal chief, it shall be his duty and 
responsibility to preside over tribal council meetings.

Sec. 2. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council shall insure that an accurate record of 
all transactions of the council is maintained. He shall submit promptly, to the 
Superintendent of the Choctaw Agency, copies of the minutes, resolutions adopted, and 
ordinances passed at all regular and special meetings of the tribal council as required by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 3. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council shall cause to be audited all tribal 
funds and accounts at least once each year and at such other times as required by the 

tribal council or by the Secretary of the Interior and shall sign and approve all 
disbursements of tribal funds (or funds under control of the tribe); he shall also sign and 
approve all contracts negotiated by the tribal chief on behalf of the tribe unless otherwise 
provided by the tribal council.

Sec. 4. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council, and such other officers and 
employees of the tribe, who are responsible for safeguarding tribal resources, shall be 
bonded and the cost of such bond shall be borne by the tribe. The amount of the bond 
shall be determined by the tribal council as required by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 5. The secretary-treasurer of the tribal council, by reason of his office, shall preside 
over such committees as are established by the tribal council on budgetary and financial 
matters.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEETINGS

 
 Sec. 1. The tribal council shall hold regular meetings on the second Tuesday in January, 
April, July, and October of each year. Special meetings of the tribal council:

(a)  may be called by the tribal chief when in his judgment they are required.

(b) 

shall be called by the tribal chief at the written request of at least nine (9)
members of the tribal council or a majority of the council membership, 
whichever is higher.

The business of special meetings shall be limited to the matters specified in the call.

Sec. 2. A majority of the members of the tribal council shall constitute a quorum for the 
transaction of any tribal business.

Sec. 3. The tribal council in the conduct of its business shall be governed by Robert’s 
Rules of Order.
 
 

ARTICLE III - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the enrolled members 
of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians voting in special election called for that 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior and in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those 
persons entitled to vote shall have voted, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the 
Interior for his approval. The date of such approval shall be the effective date of this 
constitution and bylaws.

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

CHOCTAW AGENCY 
 
 PHILADELPHIA, MISSISSIPPI 39350

Hr, Phillip Martin, Chief 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians 
Route 7, Box 21 
Philadelphia, Mississippi 39350

Dear Mr. Martin:

There Is enclosed the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi 

Band of Choctaw Indians which was approved by the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs on March 28, 1975.

Sincerely yours,

Superintendent

Enclosure

United States Department of the Interior
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 WASHINGTON, DC, 20245

Tribal Government 

Services

Through: Area Director/ Eastern Area Office

Mr. Robert C. Benn

Superintendent, Choctaw Agency

Dear Mr. Benn:

We have received the results of the election held on 
December 17, 1974, by the qualified voters of the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians. The election 
was called in accordance with an order duly 
approved on October 17, 1974, which permitted the 
qualified voters of the band to adopt or reject 
a proposed revised constitution and bylaws,

When the original draft of the proposed constitution 
and bylaws was submitted for Secretarial review, 
Article III of the bylaws contained a thirty percent 
adoption requirement. In conjunction with our 
approval action following the election it was 
discovered that the thirty percent requirement had 
been increased to forty percent. As you know, 
further action on the constitution has boon delayed 
pending clarification of this point as less than 
forty percent participated in the election. With 
the adoption of CHO-74-7S, the tribal council has 
adequately clarified this inconsistency, and we 
have made the necessary correction of Article III 
of the bylaws to reflect the council's true intent 
as requested.

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, 
signed by the election hoard members, the proposed 
revised constitution and bylaws was duly adopted 
by the voters.

The Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi 
Band of Choctaw Indians is hereby approved pursuant 
to the Authority delegated to me by. 230 DM 1.1 and 
returned for delivery to the band. 

Sincerely yours,

Enclosure

Commissioner of Indian Affairs
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Commissioner 

of Indian Affairs on October 17 . 1974, the attached Revised Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the band and was on Dec, 17, 1974, duly rejected adopted

by a vote of 325 for, and 237 against, in an election in which at- 

least thirty percent of the 1687 entitled to vote cast their 

ballots In accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 

of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), aS amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 

(49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

Election Board Member
 
  
  
 

 
 
 United States Department of the Interior  
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 Eastern Regional Office 
545 Marriott Drive. Suite 700 
Nashville. TN 37214

Tribal Government Services

MAY 0 3 2006

Honorable Phillip Martin
Chief, Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians
P.O. Box 6010, Choctaw Branch
Choctaw, Mississippi 39350

Dear Chief Martin:

I have received the results of the Secretarial election held on April 11, 2006, conducted for the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians (Band). The election was called in accordance with the 
original authorization of May 2, 2005, which was extended oil August 2, 2005, and December 
19, 2005. This authorization permitted the qualified voters of the Band to vote on the adoption 
or rejection of a proposed amendment to the Band’s Revised Constitution and Bylaws.

As evidenced by the “Certificate of Results of Election" signed by the Chairman and two 
members of the Election Board, proposed Amendment A was duly adopted by the voters of the 
Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians on April 11, 2006. As there was no contest to the 
election by the close of business on April 17, 2006, the “Certificate of Results of Election" 
was accordingly finalized.

Amendment A is hereby approved pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Assistant 
Secretary-Indian Affairs. Having been duly adopted, Amendment A is hereby designated as 
Amendment No. 1 of the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of 
Choctaws. Enclosed are all the pertinent documents relating to this approval.

Director, Eastern Region

Enclosure

cc: Superintendent, Choctaw Agency

Office of Tribal Relations, MS-4519-MIB
 
  
  
 

 
 
 AMENDMENT NO. I 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Sec. 2. The tribal council shall consist of elected representatives from the eight (8) 
recognized Choctaw communities. Each community shall be entitled to representation on 
the tribal council according to population as is hereinafter provided;

Bogue Chitto Community 3
Conehatta Community 3
Pearl River Community 3
Red Water Community 2
Standing Pine Community 2
Tucker Community 2
Bogue Homa Community 1
Crystal Ridge Community I
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Sec. 7.' In the regular tribal council election of June, 1975, eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms and eight (8) council 
representatives shall be elected for two (2) year terms, to wit:

Bogue Chitto Community
Conehatta Community
Pearl River Community
Red Water Community
Standing Pine Community
Tucker Community
Bogue Homa Community

4 Year Terms
1
1
1
2
1
1
1

2 Year Terms
2
2
2
0
1
1
0

For the June, 1975, tribal election, the candidate receiving the most votes in each 
community will be elected to serve for a 4-year term, with the other candidate(s) being 
elected to serve 2-year term. This provision does not apply to the Red Water and Bogue 
Homa Communities.

Beginning with the regular tribal council election of June, 1977, and continuing 
thereafter, all council representatives shall be elected for four (4) year terms.

Upon approval of this paragraph by the Secretary of the Interior, a special election shall 
be held for the elected representative from the Crystal Ridge Community. Thereafter, 
regular elections for the Crystal Ridge representative shall be held in election years in 
which there is not a regular election for the election of tribal chief.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 7. Any of the eight (8) recognized Choctaw communities represented on the 
tribal council may petition for the recall of a member it has elected by presenting, at least 
six months prior to the expiration of such member’s term of office, a petition signed by at 
least forty percent (40%) of the eligible voters in that community. Within sixty (60) days 
the tribal council shall cause to be held a special election on the question of recall. No 
council member shall be recalled except by the affirmative vote of a majority of those 
voting in an election in which at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the persons eligible 
to vote shall have voted. Should the recall be approved by the voters, Article VI, 
Sections I and 2, above, shall apply.
 
 

ARTICLE VII-COMMUNITY ORGANIZATIONS

 
 The enrolled members of the eight Choctaw communities shall have the right to form 
local community organizations and adopt their own rules and regulations in harmony 
with this constitution and bylaws. It shall be the duty of the councilman from each 
community to report regularly all the actions and decisions of the tribal council to the 
community organizations.

approval

I, Franklin Keel, Director, Eastern Regional Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue
of the authority delegated to the Assistant Secretary-Indian Affairs by the Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to me, do hereby approve the 
foregoing Amendment No. I to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi
Band of Choctaw Indians; provided, that nothing in this approval would be contrary to 
Federal law.

Director, Eastern Regional Office

Date: MAY 0 3 2006
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Eastern Regional Director, Bureau of Indian 

Affairs, on May 2, 2005 and extended on December 19, 2005, the attached Amendment 

to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Mississippi Band of Choctaw Indians was 

submitted to the qualified voters of the Band and was on April 11,2006,  duly 

adopted / rejected by a vote of 140 for, and 30 against, in an election in which at 

least forty percent of the 288 entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended 

by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

Election Board Member

Election Board Member

