HeinOnline

Citation:
George Emory Fay, Compiler %26 Editor. Charters,
Constitutions and By-Laws of the Indian Tribes of North
America (1967-1981 All Published).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Thu Jun 28 11:22:14 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device
 
 

CONSTITUTION OF THE COCOPAH TRIBE

SOMERTON, ARIZONA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Cocopah Indians, all of whom are members of the Cocopah Tribe and whose 
names appear on the Cocopah Rolls, June 10, 1958, and approved by the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs on July 30, 1959, do hereby voluntarily join together in order to esta
blish a legal Tribal Organization for exercising certain powers which will promote 
the common welfare of our membership, and do hereby adopt this Constitution,

ARTICLE I — TERRITORY

The territory to be administered by the Cocopah Tribe shall consist of all the 
land specified in Executive Order 2711, dated September 27, 1917, and Public Law 85- 
150 of August 17, 1961, and any other land in which by virtue of purchase, gift, Act 
of Congress, or otherwise, the Cocopah Tribe acquires an ownership, management, use 
or occupancy interest.

ARTICLE II — NAME OF ORGANIZATION

The name of the organization shall be the Cocopah Tribe.

ARTICLE III — MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1. The membership of the Cocopah Tribe shall consist of:

(a)  All Cocopah Indians whose names appear on the official census roll of June 10, 

1958, and approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on July 30, 1959, provided 
such persons are not enrolled as members of some other tribe, band, or community of 
Indians; and provided further, that within five years from the adoption of this Con
stitution, corrections may be made in the roll by the governing body, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(b)  Any child of one-fourth degree or more of Cocopah Indian blood who is born to 

a member of the Cocopah Tribe, provided that a certified copy of the child's birth 
certificate or other satisfactory evidence of birth or parentage is forwarded to the 
Secretary-Treasurer of the Cocopah Tribe within one year from date of the child’s 
birth or the approval date of this constitution, whichever is later.

SEC. 2. The Tribal Council of the Cocopah Tribe shall have the power to adopt re
solutions covering the adoption of new members subject to the approval of a majority 
vote of eligible voters, voting in a regularly called tribal meeting, and subject fur
ther to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representa
tive, except that no person shall be adopted into the Cocopah Tribe who is not a citi
zen of the United States or who is a member of some other tribe, band or community of 
Indians unless that person relinquish that membership and all such persons desiring 
tribal membership must have had on file, with the Cocopah Tribe, an application for 
membership for at least one year.

ARTICLE IV — GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Cocopah Tribe shall be the Tribal Council 
composed of five (5) members, consisting of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and three 
other members. Three of such members shall constitute a quorum,

SEC. 2. The membership of the Cocopah Tribe shall elect from its own membership, 
at a meeting called for this purpose, by secret ballot a Chairman, and Vice-Chairman 
and three council members to serve on the Tribal Council. First election under this 
Constitution shall be held within sixty (60) days following approval of this Constitu
tion, and elections shall be held thereafter at two year intervals on the month and 
day as set forth in Article V, Members of the Tribal Council may succeed themselves.

SEC. 3. The Chairman, or a majority of the Tribal Council, or twenty-five percent 

(25%) of the qualified voters may, by written notice, call tribal meetings of the Co
copah Tribe. Twenty-five percent (25%) of the qualified voters of the tribe shall 
constitute a quorum at any tribal meeting.

SEC. 4. All members of the Cocopah Tribe who have reached the age of twenty-one 

(21) years shall be qualified voters at any meeting of election.

ARTICLE V  — ELECTIONS

SECTION 1. The General Meeting of the Cocopah Tribe for the purpose of electing 
the Tribal Council in all subsequent elections shall be held in even numbered years 
on the second Friday in July. The meeting and voting place shall be on the Cocopah 
Reservation as designated by the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall cause no
tice to be posted of such meeting and election in at least two places on the Cocopah 
Reservation fifteen (15) days prior to the meetings and election.

SEC. 2. Special meetings and elections may be called by the Tribal Council for 

electing a Tribal Council member to fill the unexpired term of a deceased member, a 
member who has resigned, or been removed for other cause, provided that notice of 
such meeting and election shall be given as in the case of regular election meetings.

SEC. 3. Nominations for the Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and three other members of 

the Tribal Council shall be made from the floor at the General or Special Meeting of 
the Cocopah Tribe,

SEC. 4. The elections shall be by secret ballot. The Tribal Council shall pre
scribe rules for the casting and canvassing of ballots, including the procedures for 
handling absentee ballots. They will also prescribe the necessary details of elec
tion procedures covering the election of Tribal Council members and referendum elec
tions.

ARTICLE VI — POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

SECTION 1. Enumerated Powers. The Tribal Council representing the Cocopah Tribe 

shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the Con
stitution or the Statutes of the United States applicable to Indians, and subject 
further to all expressed restrictions upon such powers contained in this Constitution, 
The Chairman of the Tribal Council may veto resolutions or ordinances of the Tribal 
Council, within three days of date of passage, however, upon reconsideration by the 
Tribal Council, a majority vote of those present at a duly constituted meeting will 
over-ride the Chairman’s veto.

A.  Powers not subject to approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authori

zed representative:

(1)  To represent the Cocopah Tribe and act in all matters that concern the wel

fare of the Cocopah Tribe and to make any and all decisions which are consistent with 
this Constitution and the Statutes of the United States.

(2)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal lands, in

terests in land or other tribal assets.

(3)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative 

with regard to all appropriate estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
tribe prior to submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Con
gress.

(4)  To regulate and license and/or issue peddlers' permits to members or non- 

members to do business on the reservation in a manner not inconsistent with traders' 
licenses issued by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

(5)  To engage in any business that will further the economic well-being of the 

members of the tribe or to undertake any activity of any nature whatever not incon
sistent with law or with any provision of this Constitution.

(6)  To make and perform contracts including loan contracts and agreements of 
every description not inconsistent with law or with any provision of this Constitu
tion with any person, association, corporation, municipality, county, State or with 
the United States.

(7)  To pledge or assign chattel and crop mortgages as security for loans, or 

approve individual assignments.

(8)  To regulate its own procedures; to appoint subordinate committees, commis

sions, and boards; and to create and regulate subordinate organizations for economic 
and other purposes.

(9)  To negotiate with Federal Government, State, City and County Officials.

(10)  The Tribal Council may exercise such additional powers as may be delegated 

to it by the members of the tribe and take such actions as are necessary to carry in
to effect any of its powers and duties.

B.  Powers subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authori

zed representative:

(1)  To acquire, manage, lease, use, contract, assign, encumber, or dispose of 

any or all tribal assets, subject to approval when required by law and regulations.

(2)  To employ legal counsel, the contract, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(3) With the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized re

presentative, assign future tribal Income from trust property.

(4)  To budget tribal funds and manage economic affairs and enterprises in ac

cordance with the terms of the budget and this Constitution.

(5)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances providing for the levying of taxes; 

dealing with Law and Order, domestic relations, and welfare; providing for the licen
sing of members and non-members for purposes of hunting and fishing on the reserva
tion, and for the exclusion from the territory of the community of persons not so li
censed and establishing proper agencies for the enforcement of such ordinances upon 
the reservation.

(6)  The Tribal Council may elect to designate a commercial bank as the Cocopah 

Tribe’s depository.

ARTICLE VII — BILL OF RIGHTS

SECTION 1. All members of the tribe shall be accorded equal political rights and 

equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources and activities of the 
tribe, and no person shall be denied freedom of conscience, speech, association or as
sembly, or due process of law, or the right to petition for the redress of grievances. 
The members of the tribe shall continue undisturbed in their religious beliefs and 
nothing in this Constitution will authorize the Tribal Council to interfere with re
ligious practices.

ARTICLE VIII — REVIEW BY THE SECRETARY

Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this Constitution is subject to 

review by the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized representative shall be 
presented to the Superintendent in Charge of the Reservation who shall within ten (10) 
days of receipt approve or disapprove same. If the Superintendent in Charge of the 
Reservation shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become ef
fective , but he shall submit a copy of the same hearing his endorsement, to the Se
cretary of the Interior, or his authorized representative, who may, within ninety (90) 
days from the date of the Superintendent’s approval, rescind the said ordinance or re
solution for any cause by notifying the Tribal Council of such rescission. If the Se
cretary shall fail to act within the ninety (90) day period, the ordinance or resolu
tion shall remain in effect as of the date of the Superintendent’s approval.

If the Superintendent in Charge of the Reservation shall refuse to approve any re
solution or ordinance submitted to him within ten (10) days after receipt by him, he 
shall advise the Tribal Council of his reasons therefor in writing. If those reasons 
appear insufficient to the Tribal Council, they may by majority vote, refer the ordi
nance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized representa
tive, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of its submission to him, ap
prove same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become effec
tive.

ARTICLE IX — REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION FROM OFFICE

SECTION 1. If a member of the Tribal Council fails or refuses to attend two regu

lar meetings, unless excused due to illness or other causes for which he cannot be 
held responsible, or shall be convicted of a felony, or of a misdemeanor resulting in 
a jail sentence, his office may be declared forfeited by a resolution of the Tribal 
Council.

SEC. 2. Any Tribal Council member resigning or taken by death out of office or removed
 
 

 
 
  for other cause may be replaced by appointment of the Tribal Council pending 

an election in accordance with Article V, Section 2.

ARTICLE X — AMENDMENTS

SECTION 1. This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of qualified vo

ters of the tribe voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of 
the Interior, or his authorized representative provided that at least thirty percent 
(30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall 
become effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior 
or his authorized representative.

SEC. 2. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized 

representative, to call an election on any proposed amendment at the request of the 
Tribal Council, or upon presentation of a petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of 
the qualified voters of the tribe.

ARTICLE XI — ORGANIZATION OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL
 
 

AND DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 SECTION 1. The Chairman of the Tribal Council shall preside over all meetings of 

the Tribal Council, and perform all duties of a Chairman and exercise any authority 
given him specifically by the Tribal Council or by a general meeting of the Cocopah 
Tribe. He shall vote only in case of a tie.

SEC. 2. The Vice-Chairman, in the absence of the Chairman, shall preside, and 
when so presiding, shall have all powers, privileges, duties and responsibilities of 
the Chairman. He shall have the power to vote in all meetings except those under his 
direction. In this case he shall vote only when there is a tie vote.

SEC. 3. In the absence of both the Chairman and the Vice-Chairman, the Tribal 
Council members shall elect a temporary Chairman who shall perform the duties and 
responsibilities of the Chairman.

SEC. 4. The Tribal Council at its first regular meeting following election, shall 
elect from within or without its own membership a Secretary-Treasurer, The Secretary 
-Treasurer shall conduct Tribal Council correspondence at the direction of the Chair
man, and it shall be his duty to submit promptly to the Officer in Charge of the Re
servation or other appropriate offices of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, copies of all 
minutes of regular and special meetings of the Tribal Council as well as copies of 
all resolutions and ordinances adopted by the Tribal Council.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard 

all funds in the custody of the Tribal Council and forward all funds to the appro
priate Individual Indian Money Account or other designated depository. He shall make 
and preserve a faithful record of such funds and shall report all receipts and expen
ditures and the  amount and nature of all funds in his custody. Such report being
made in writing  to the Tribal Council at regular meetings and at such other times as
requested by the Tribal Council. He shall not disburse any tribal funds in his cus
tody or custody  of the Tribal  Council except when properly authorized to do so by a
resolution duly  passed by the Tribal Council and/or in accordance with the approved
tribal budget.

The books and records of the Secretary-Treasurer shall be audited at least once 

each year by a competent auditor secured by the Tribal Council and at such other 
times as the Tribal Council may direct. A copy of all audit reports shall be filed 
with the Tribal Council and Superintendent.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the Tri

bal Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the expense of which shall be 
accepted by the tribe. Until the Secretary-Treasurer is bonded, the Tribal Council 
with the approval of the Superintendent may make such provision for the custody and 
disbursement of funds as shall guarantee their safety and proper disbursement and 
use.

ARTICLE XII — QUALIFICATIONS OF TRIBAL COUNCIL MEMBERS

SECTION 1. Any member of the Cocopah Tribe shall be qualified to be a candidate 
for election to the Tribal Council who has reached the age of twenty-one (21) years 
and who resides within a radius of fifty (50) miles from the present reservation land 
and within the United States.

ARTICLE XIII — TRIBAL COUNCIL MEETINGS

SECTION 1. At the first meeting of the Tribal Council following a regular elec

tion, the Tribal Council members shall see that members have a correct and clear un
derstanding of this Constitution, management of tribal affairs, and rules of conduct
ing their meetings.

SEC. 2. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held the second Friday of 
each month at a place and time specified by the Chairman at the previous meeting. In 
case the regular meeting date falls on a State or National Holiday, the Tribal Coun
cil may postpone such regular meeting not to exceed 10 (ten) days.

SEC. 3. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the Chairman, or 
the Chairman shall call a special meeting when presented a written request signed by 
three or more Tribal Council members.

SEC. 4. Robert’s Rules of Order shall apply in conducting business at all meet

ings. The Tribal Council may vote by voice, but at the discretion of the Chairman, 
or upon request by one or more members, a secret vote shall be taken.

SEC. 5. The Tribal Council shall decide all business matters by a majority vote 

of those present at a duly constituted meeting.

ARTICLE XIV — ADOPTION

This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the 
Cocopah Tribe of the Cocopah Reservation, voting at a special election called by the 
Secretary of the Interior, in which at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to 
vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, for approval, 
and shall be effective from the date of such approval.

Pursuant to an order approved July 24, 1964, by the Assistant Secretary of the Interior,
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
  the attached Constitution of the Cocopah Tribe was submitted for ratifica
tion to the qualified voters of the reservation, and was on October 8, 1964, duly 
adopted by a vote of 16 for, and 0 against, in an election in which over 30 percent 
of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with Section 16 of the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 
June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

LOUIS S. SAN DIEGO 
Chairman, Cocopah Tribal Council

HOMER M. GILLILAND
Superintendent,Colorado

River Agency
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, JOHN A. CARVER, JR., Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States 

of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Constitution of the Cocopah 
Tribe, Somerton, Arizona,

Approval recommended:

JAMES E. OFFICER

October 29, 1964

Associate Commissioner
Bureau of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.

Date: Nov, 16, 1964.

JOHN A. CARVER, JR.
Assistant Secretary of the Interior

[SEAL]

