 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE


 
  
  
 COEUR D’ALENE TRIBE. 
 
IDAHO

 
 APPROVED AUGUST 8, 1947 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE


 
  
 WASHINGTON: 1957 
 

 
CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

 
 COEUR D’ALENE TRIBE, IDAHO

Preamble

We, the Indians of the Coeur d’Alene Reservation in Idaho, in 
order to build an independent and honorable life, and to promote the 
common welfare of the Tribe, do hereby ordain and establish this 
Constitution and By-Laws.

Article I—Territory

This tribal organization, to be known as the Coeur d’Alene Tribe, 
shall include all the trust and tribal lands within the original con
fines of the Coeur d’Alene Reservation as established by Executive 
Orders of June 14, 1867, and November 8, 1873, and shall extend to 
such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe shall 

consist as follows of:

(a)  All Indians whose names appear on the official census roll of 
the Coeur d’Alene Tribe as of July 1, 1940: Provided that corrections 
may be made in the said roll by the Tribal Council within five years 
from the adoption and approval of this constitution, subject to 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(b)  All children of one-fourth or more Indian blood born subse
quent to July 1, 1940, to any member of the Tribe maintaining tribal 
affiliations at the time of the birth of such children.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall have power to promulgate ordi
nances, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or 
his authorized representative, governing future membership, provided 
that no individual of less than one-fourth Indian blood shall be ad
mitted to membership hereafter.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe shall 
be a Tribal Council consisting of seven members duly elected to serve 
three years.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall elect from its membership (1) 
a chairman, (2) a vice-chairman, (3) a secretary-treasurer, and may 
appoint or employ such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary.

Sec. 3. No person shall be eligible for election to the Tribal Coun
cil unless he shall be a member of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe and shall 
have resided within the boundaries of the reservation for a period 
of one year next preceding his election and be at least 21 years of age.
Sec. 4. The Tribal Council shall be the sole judge of the qualifica

tions of its members.

Article IV—Nominations and Elections

Section 1. The candidates for membership in the Tribal Council 
shall be elected by popular vote at a meeting of the tribe on the first 
Saturday in May of each year.

Sec. 2. The first election of the Tribal Council hereunder shall 
be called and supervised by the Superintendent of the Northern Idaho 
Agency and the present Council within sixty days after approval of 
this Constitution by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 3. At the first election, the three candidates receiving the 
highest number of votes shall hold office for three years. The two 
candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall hold 
office for two years. The two candidates receiving the next highest 
number of votes shall hold office for one year. Thereafter, elections 
for the Tribal Council shall be held each year for two members of the 
Tribal Council except every third year when three shall be elected. 
After the first election, members of the Tribal Council shall be elected 
to serve for a term of three years, or until their successors are duly 
elected and qualified.

Sec. 4. All elections except the first shall be held in accordance 

with rules laid down by the Tribal Council.

Sec. 5. The time and place of voting shall be designated by the 
Tribal Council, and they shall certify to the election of the members 
of the Council within five days after said election.

Sec. 6. Any enrolled member of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe who is 

twenty-one (21) years of age or over shall be entitled to vote.

Article V—Installation of Councilmen

Section 1. Each member of the Tribal Council and each officer 
elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of office prior to 
assuming the duties thereof.

Article VI—Vacancies and Removal from Office

Section. 1. If a councilman should die, resign, be removed from 
office, permanently leave the reservation, or be convicted of a felony, 
the Tribal Council shall declare the position vacant and appoint a 
successor to serve until the next general election.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council may, by a majority vote of the total 
membership of the Council, expel or suspend any of its members for 
neglect of duty or gross misconduct. Before any vote for expulsion 
is taken, such member or officer shall be given a written statement of 
the charges against him at least five days before the meeting of the 
Council before which he is to appear, and he shall be given an oppor
tunity to answer any and all charges at a designated Council meeting. 
The decision of the Council shall be final.

Article VII—Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall have the following powers 
subject to any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Constitution 
of the United States:

(a)  To represent the Tribe and negotiate with outside agencies and 

persons;

(b)  To administer all tribal property by ordinances subject to the 

approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs;

(c)  To borrow money, subject to the approval of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs, from the Indian credit fund or from any other gov
ernmental agency, and to pledge or assign future tribal income as 
security for such loans;

(d)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his duly authorized 
representative governing the conduct of the members of the Tribe; to 
establish a reservation court and to adopt a suitable code for the main
tenance of law and order which shall be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his duly authorized representative;

(e)  To levy license fees and taxes upon members through the adop
tion of ordinances that shall be subject to the approval of the Commis

4

sioner of Indian Affairs provided that any such ordinances shall not 
apply to members of the Tribe until approved by popular referendum;
(f)  To exclude from the restricted lands of the reservation persons 
not legally entitled to reside thereon under ordinances which shall be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his duly 
authorized representative;

(g)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of attorney and the fixing 
of attorney fees to be approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his 
duly authorized representative.

Article VIII—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the qualified members of the Tribe who vote at an election called for 
that purpose by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to call 
an election of any proposed amendment at the request of the majority 
of the Council, or upon presentation of a petition signed by at least 
thirty percent of the qualified voters of the Tribe, but no amendment 
shall become effective until it shall have been approved by the Commis
sioner of Indian Affairs.

BY-LAWS OF THE COEUR D’ALENE TRIBE

Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman. The Chairman of the Tribal Council shall 
preside over all meetings of the Council and of the Tribe. He shall 
perform all duties of a chairman. He shall vote only in the case of a 
tie.

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman. The Vice-Chairman of the Tribal Coun
cil shall perform the duties of the Chairman in the absence of the 
Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer. The Secretary-Treasurer of the 
Tribal Council shall conduct all correspondence and keep a complete 
record of all matters transacted at council and tribal meetings. He 
shall account for all Council and tribal funds coming into his custody 
and shall furnish a bond acceptable to the Tribal Council and the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs. Disbursements of such funds shall be 
covered by warrants approved by the Tribal Council.

Article II—Meetings and Procedure

Section 1. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Tribal 
Council shall be held quarterly in the months of January, April, July, 
and October on a day designated by the Chairman.

Sec. 2. Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Tribal Council 
may be called by the Chairman or by petition signed by a majority of 
the Council members.

Sec. 3. Quorum. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum 

is present. A quorum shall consist of five (5) Council members.

Sec. 4. Compensation. The Tribal Council may prescribe such 
compensation for officers, members and committees of the Council as 
it deems advisable from such funds as may be available.

Article III—Ratification

This Constitution and By-laws shall become effective upon ratifica
tion, by a majority of the adult members of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe of 
Indians voting, at an election authorized for that purpose by the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved on May 6,1947, by the Acting Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, the attached Constitution and By-laws 
was duly submitted to the adult voters of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe, 
Idaho, for ratification, and was on June 5, 1947, duly ratified by a 
vote of 60 for, and 4 against.

Paschal J. George
Chairman, Tribal Council
Lena Louie
Secretary, Tribal Council 

Archie Phinney
Superintendent, Northern Idaho Agency
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 This Constitution and By-laws, having been proposed and duly 
ratified by the members of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Idaho on June 
5,1947, at a referendum called by the Acting Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, is herewith approved.

William Zimmerman, Jr.
Acting Commissioner of Indiam, Affairs.

Chicago, Illinois, August 8, 1947

