CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE COEUR

-33-

D’ALENE TRIBE OF IDAHO

Approved August 8, 1947 
Amended
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Indians of the Coeur d'Alene Reservation in Idaho, in order to build an 
independent and honorable life, and to promote the common welfare of the Tribe, do 
hereby ordain and establish this Constitution and By-Laws.

ARTICLE I  — TERRITORY

This tribal organization, to be known as the Coeur d’Alene Tribe, shall include 

all the trust and tribal lands within the original confines of the Coeur d’Alene 
Reservation as established by Executive Orders of June 14, 1867, and November 8, 
1873, and shall extend to such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto.

ARTICLE II  — MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1. The membership of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe shall consist as follows 

of:

(a). All Indians whose names appear on the official census roll of the Coeur 

d’Alene Tribe as of July 1, 1940; Provided, that corrections may be made in 
the said roll by the Tribal Council within five years from the adoption and 
approval of this constitution, subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior or his authorized representative.

(b). All children of one-fourth or more Indian blood born subsequent to July 1, 

1940, to any member of the Tribe maintaining tribal affiliations at the time 
of the birth of such children.

SEC. 2. The Tribal Council shall have power to promulgate ordinances, subject to 

the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative, gov
erning future membership, provided that no individual of less than one-fourth Indian 
blood shall be admitted to membership hereafter.

ARTICLE III  — GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe shall be a Tribal Coun

cil consisting of seven members duly elected to serve three years.

SEC. 2. The Tribal Council shall elect from its membership (1) a chairman, (2) a 

vice-chairman, (3) a secretary-treasurer, and may appoint or employ such other offi
cers and committees as may be deemed necessary.

SEC. 3. No person shall be eligible for election to the Tribal Council unless 

he shall be a member of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe and shall have resided within the

-34-

boundaries of the reservation for a period of one year next preceding his election 
and be at least 21 years of age.

SEC. 4. The Tribal Council shall be the sole Judge of the qualifications of its 

members.

ARTICLE IV — NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

SECTION 1. The candidates for membership in the Tribal Council shall be elected 
by popular vote at a meeting of the tribe on the first Saturday in May of each year.

SEC. 2. The first election of the Tribal Council hereunder shall be called and 
supervised by the Superintendent of the Northern Idaho Agency and the present Council 
within sixty days after approval of this Constitution by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

SEC. 3. At the first election, the three candidates receiving the highest number 

of votes shall hold office for three years. The ';wo candidates receiving the next 
highest number of votes shall hold office for two years. The two candidates receiv
ing the next highest number of votes shall hold office for one year. Thereafter, 
elections for the Tribal Council shall be held each year for two members of the Tri
bal Council except every third year when three shall be elected. After the first 
election, members of the Tribal Council shall be elected to serve for a term of three 
years, or until their successors are duly elected and qualified.

SEC. 4, All elections except the first shall be held in accordance with rules 

laid down by the Tribal Council.

SEC. 5. The time and place of voting shall be designated by the Tribal Council, 
and they shall certify to the election of the members of the Council within five days 
after said election.

SEC. 6. Any enrolled member of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe who is twenty-one (21) 

years of age or over shall be entitled to vote.

ARTICLE V — INSTALLATION OF COUNCILMEN

SECTION 1. Each member of the Tribal Council and each officer elected or appointed 

hereunder shall take an oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof.

ARTICLE VI — VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

SECTION 1. If a councilman should die, resign, be removed from office, permanent

ly leave the reservation, or be convicted of a felony, the Tribal Council shall de
clare the position vacant and appoint a successor to serve until the next general 
election.

SEC. 2. The Tribal Council may, by a majority vote of the total membership of 
the Council, expel or suspend any of its members for neglect of duty or gross miscon
duct. Before any vote for expulsion is taken, such member or officer shall be given 
a written statement of the charges against him at least five days before the meeting 
of the Council before which he is to appear, and he shall be given an opportunity to 
answer any and all charges at a designated Council meeting. The decision of the 
Council shall be final.

ARTICLE VII — POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

SECTION 1, The Tribal Council shall have the following powers subject to any 

limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Constitution of the United States:

(a) . To represent the Tribe and negotiate with outside agencies and persons;

-35-

(b) . To administer all tribal property by ordinances subject to the approval of the 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs;

(c) . To borrow money, subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
from the Indian credit fund or from any other governmental agency, and to 
pledge or assign future tribal income as security for such loans;

(d). To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior or his duly authorized representative governing 
the conduct of the members of the Tribe; to establish a reservation court and 
to adopt a suitable code for the maintenance of law and order which shall be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his duly author
ized representative;

(e) . To levy license fees and taxes upon members through the adoption of ordinances 

that shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
provided that any such ordinances shall not apply to members of the Tribe 
until approved by popular referendum;

(f). To exclude from the restricted lands of the reservation persons not legally 

entitled to reside thereon under ordinances which shall be subject to the ap
proval of the Secretary of the Interior or his duly authorized representative;

(g). To employ legal counsel, the choice of attorney and the fixing of attorney fees 

to be approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his duly authorized repre
sentative,

ARTICLE VIII — AMENDMENTS

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified 

members of the Tribe who vote at an election called for that purpose by the Commis
stioner of Indian Affairs.

It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to call an election of 

any proposed amendment at the request of the majority of the Council, or upon pre
sentation of a petition signed by at least thirty percent of the qualified voters of 
the Tribe, but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved 
by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs,

BY-LAWS OF THE COEUR D’ALENE TRIBE

ARTICLE I — DUTIES OF OFFICERS

-36—

SECTION 1. Chairman. The Chairman of the Tribal Council shall preside over all 
meetings of the Council and of the Tribe. He shall perform all duties of a chairman. 
He shall vote only in the case of a tie.

SBC. 2. Vice-Chairman. The Vice-chairman of the Tribal Council shall perform the 

duties of the Chairman in the absence of the Chairman.

SEC. 3. Secretary-Treasurer. The Secretary-Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall 

conduct all correspondence and keep a complete record of all matters transacted at 
council and tribal meetings. He shall account for all Council and tribal funds com
ing into his custody and shall furnish a bond acceptable to the Tribal Council and 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, Disbursements of such funds shall be covered by 
warrants approved by the Tribal Council.

ARTICLE II — MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

SECTION 1. Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be 
held quarterly in the months of January, April, July, and October on a day designated 
by the Chairman.

SEC. 2, Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called 

by the Chairman or by petition signed by a majority of the Council members.

SEC. 3. Quorum. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is present. A 

quorum shall consist of five (5) Council members.

SEC. 4. Compensation. The Tribal Council may prescribe such compensation for 
officers, members and committees of the Council as it deems advisable from such funds 
as may be available,

ARTICLE III — RATIFICATION

This Constitution and By-laws shall become effective upon ratification, by a ma
jority of the adult members of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Indians voting, at an elec
tion authorized for that purpose by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs,
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved on May 6, 1947, by the Acting Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, the attached Constitution and By-laws was duly submitted to the adult voters 
of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe, Idaho, for ratification, and was on June 5, 1947, duly 
ratified by a vote of 60 for, and 4 against,

PASCHAL J. GEORGE 

Chairman, Tribal Council
 
  
  
 

ARCHIE PHINNEY

 
 Superintendent, Northern Idaho Agency 
 

LENA LOUIE

 
 Secretary, Tribal Council

This Constitution and By-laws, having been proposed and duly ratified by the mem
bers of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Idaho on June 5, 1947, at a referendum called by 
the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs, is herewith approved.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 WILLIAM ZIMMERMAN, JR.

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Chicago, Illinois, August 8, 1947.
 
 

AMENDMENT I

 
 By amending Section 1, sub-section (a), Article II of the Constitution so that it 

will read as follows:

SECTION 1. The membership of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe shall consist as follows of;

(a) All Indians whose names appear on the official census roll of the Coeur d’Alere 

tribe as of July 1, 1940; Provided, that corrections may be made in said roll 
by the Tribal Council until January 1, 1962, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative. Applications 
for corrections of said roll must be filed with the Secretary of the Coeur 
d’Alene Tribal Council on or before July 1, 1961.
 
 

AMENDMENT II

 
 By amending Article II, Section 1, sub-section (b) of said Constitution so that 

it will read as follows:

SECTION 1. The membership of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe shall consist as follows of:

(b). All children of one-fourth or more Indian blood born subsequent to July 1, 

1940, to any member of the tribe.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, H. Rex Lee, Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, United States Department of 
the Interior, pursuant to the authority provided In Article VIII of the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe, having satisfied myself that Amendment I, and 
Amendment II to the Coeur d’Alene Constitution were accepted by the members of the 
Coeur d’Alene Tribe at a duly called election on November 26, 1960, by a vote of 107 
for and 68 against and 101 for and 74 against respectively, do hereby approve the 
attached Amendment I and Amendment II, and the Constitution and Bylaws of the Coeur 
d’Alene Tribe as approved on August 8, 1947, Is amended accordingly.

(Deputy) Commissioner of Indian Affairs

H. REX LEE

Feb. 3, 1961 
Washington, D. C.
 
 

ADOPTION ORDINANCE

 
 Be it enacted, by the Coeur d’Alene Tribal Council, in a meeting held at the 
Coeur d'Alene Sub-Agency, Plummer, Idaho, on December 17, 1952, that any person who 
desires to be adopted as a member of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe of Indians of the Coeur 
d’Alene Indian Reservation, State of Idaho, shall make written application to the 
Coeur d'Alene Tribal Council through a Committee on Membership which is established 
by Section (a) of this Ordinance.

(a)  . A temporary membership committee consisting of three members shall be appoint

ed or selected by the Coeur d'Alene Tribal Council as the situation arises, 
whose duties it shall be to consider and pass upon all applications for mem
bership presented to the Council, and shall conduct all investigations of 
tribal status; degree of blood, and other characteristics of the applicants 
as it shall deem necessary in determining whether the applicants shall be 
adopted as members of the tribe.

(b)  . No person may be considered for adoption into the Coeur d’Alene Indian Tribe 

unless he or she shall be at least eighteen years of age and at least one- 
quarter degree of Indian blood, and must have maintained residence within the 
Coeur d’Alene Reservation for a period of eighteen years immediately prior to 
the filing of the application for adoption; provided however, that applicants 
absence from the Reservation for any period in excess of five consecutive 
years during the aforesaid eighteen-year residence requirement shall be a 
bar to adoption; provided further, that bonafide absence for purposes of 
attending school or service in the Armed Forces shall not be deemed as ab
sence from the Reservation.

(c) . No person may be adopted into the Coeur d’Alene Tribe unless he or she signs 

a written statement relinquishing membership and all interest which he or 
she may have in tribal property or assets of any other tribe or reservation.

-39-

(d) . Persons recommended by the Committee for Adoption shall not become members of 

the tribe unless approved by two-thirds majority vote of the Coeur d’Alene 
Tribal Council meeting in regular session.

(e) . Persons adopted into the Tribe by the Tribal Council shall be enrolled on the 

official Coeur d’Alene Tribal census roll. Children of such adopted members 
who are of not less than one-quarter degree Indian blood and who have no mem
bership or interest in tribal property or assets of any other tribe or reser
vation shall also be deemed members of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe and placed on 
the official Coeur d’Alene Tribal Census roll.

(f) . Any person adopted into the Coeur d’Alene Tribe under this Ordinance shall 
participate in any payments or other benefits accruing to the Tribe subse
quent to the date of adoption.

(g) . The foregoing Ordinance is promulgated pursuant to Section 2, Article II, 

Constitution and By-laws of the Coeur d’Alene Tribe, Idaho, approved by the 
Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs on September 2, 1948, and supersedes 
the Adoption Ordinance approved by the Coeur d’Alene Tribal Council on Jan
uary 5, 1952, as amended by the Coeur d’Alene Tribal Council on May 24, 1952. 
Adopted by a vote of 5 for and none against, a quorum being present.

COEUR D’ALENE TRIBAL COUNCIL:

PASCHAL J. GEORGE 
Chairman.

FELIX A. ARIPA

Acting Secretary,

Recommended for Approval:

M.L. ROBERTSON

Superintendent, Northern Idaho Indian Agency

Approved: April 22, 1953 

Washington, D.C.
 
 

ORME LEWIS

 
 Assistant Secretary of the Interior

[SEAL]

