Constitution and by-laws of the Colorado river Indian tribes of the 
Colorado river reservation. Approved August 13, 1937.
Colorado River Indian Tribes of the Colorado River Indian Reservation, Arizona and California.
Washington, U.S. Govt. Print. Off., 1937.

https://hdl.handle.net/2027/uiug.30112124398485

HathiTrust

www.hathitrust.org

Public Domain in the United States, 
Google-digitized
http://www.hathitrust.org/access_use#pd-us-google

We have determined this work to be in the public domain 
in the United States of America. It may not be in the 
public domain in other countries. Copies are provided 
as a preservation service. Particularly outside of the 
United States, persons receiving copies should make 
appropriate efforts to determine the copyright status 
of the work in their country and use the work accordingly. 
It is possible that current copyright holders, heirs or 
the estate of the authors of individual portions of the 
work, such as illustrations or photographs, assert copyrights 
over these portions. Depending on the nature of subsequent 
use that is made, additional rights may need to be obtained 
independently of anything we can address. The digital 
images and OCR of this work were produced by Google, 
Inc. (indicated by a watermark on each page in the 
PageTurner). Google requests that the images and OCR 
not be re-hosted, redistributed or used commercially. 
The images are provided for educational, scholarly, 
non-commercial purposes.


UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF

THE COLORADO RIVER INDIAN TRIBES 

OF THE COLORADO RIVER

RESERVATION 


 
  
  
 APPROVED AUGUST 13, 1937 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON: 1937 
 

CONSTITUTION OF THE COLORADO RIVER INDIAN
TRIBES OF THE COLORADO RIVER RESERVATION, 
ARIZONA AND CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We the members of the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the Colo
rado River Reservation, in order to establish a legal tribal organiza
tion and secure certain privileges and powers offered to us by the 
Indian Reorganization Act, to establish justice, promote the general 
welfare, safeguard our interests, encourage educational progress, con
serve and develop our lands and resources, and to secure the blessings 
of freedom and. liberty for ourselves and our posterity do ordain 
and establish this Constitution and By-laws for the Colorado River 
Indian Tribes of the Colorado River Reservation.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Colorado River Indian Tribes shall include 
all the territory within the original confines of the Colorado River 
Indian Reservation boundaries as established and approved by the 
Act of March 3, 1865, in Arizona and California, and to such other 
lands as have been or may hereafter be added thereto under any law 
of the United States, except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Colorado River Indian Tribes 

shall consist as follows:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the offi
cial census roll of the Colorado River Indian Reservation as of 
January 1, 1937.

 (b) Every child born to any member of the Colorado River In
dian Tribes provided such member is a resident of the reservation at 
the time of birth of said child.

(c) Every child of one-half or more Indian blood born to any 

non-resident member of the Tribe.

Section 2. The Tribal Council shall have the power to promulgate 
 ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, cov
ering future membership and the adoption of new members, making 
any necessary adjustments of property rights.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1.  The governing body of the Colorado River Indian 

Tribes shall be known as the Colorado River Tribal Council.

Section 2.  The Tribal Council shall consist of nine councilmen 

elected by secret ballot.
 
 

 
 
 
 Section 3. The Tribal Council shall elect from within its own 
number (a) a Chairman and (b) a Vice-Chairman, and from within 
or without its own number (c) a Secretary, a Treasurer, and 
such other officers and committees as may be deemed necessary.

Section 4. Councilmen shall serve as members of the Council for 
a term of four years from the date of installation in office or until 
their successors shall have been regularly elected and certified, except 
as provided in Section 5 of this Article.

Section 5. The five members receiving the highest number of votes 
at the first election shall hold office until their successors are elected 
in December, 1940, and the four remaining members shall hold office 
until their successors are elected in December, 1938. Each council
man subsequently elected shall serve for a term of four years.

. Section 6. Thereafter elections shall be held each alternate year, 

on the first Saturday in December.

Article IV—Elections and Nominations

Section 1. All members of the Tribe who are twenty-one years of 
age and over and who have maintained a legal residence for a period 
of one year on the reservation prior to any election shall have the 
right to vote.

Section 2. Within thirty days after the ratification and approval 
of this Constitution and By-laws an election shall be conducted by. 
the present Tribal Council for the purpose of electing the members 
of the Council.

Section 3.  Elected tribal councilmen shall take office within fifteen 

days after the general election.

Section 4. Any member of the tribe whose name is presented at 
least fifteen days before the election to the Secretary or to the 
Chairman, or in his absence to the Vice-Chairman of the Council, 
by petition signed by at least ten adult members of the tribe shall 
be declared by the Council to be regularly nominated and to be a 
candidate for the office indicated in such petition. It shall be the 
duty of the Secretary to post the names of all qualified candidates 
in a public place at least ten days prior to the election.

Section 5. The Tribal Council or a board appointed by the Coun
cil, shall determine rules and regulations governing elections, and 
shall certify to the election of the members of the Council within 
one day after the election returns.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal from Office

Section 1. If a member of the Council or any official shall die, 
resign, permanently leave the reservation or shall be found guilty 
of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty in any Indian, 
State, or Federal court, the Council shall declare the position vacant 
and elect to fill the unexpired term.

Section 2. The Council may by an affirmative vote of two-thirds 
of its numbers expel any member for neglect of duty or gross mis
conduct, provided that the accused member shall be given full and 
fair opportunity to reply to any and all charges at a designated 
Council meeting, and provided further, that the accused member 

shall have been given a written notice of the charges against him 
at least five days before the meeting at which he is to appear.

Section 3. Upon a petition of at least one-third (1/3) of the eligible 
voters of the Colorado River Indian Tribes, it shall be the duty of 
the Tribal Council to call a special election for the recall of any 
member or members of the Council named in such petition. In the 
event that a majority of these voting in such election approve a 
council member’s recall from office, the office shall be declared vacant 
and the Tribal Council shall proceed in the usual manner to hold 
an election to fill the said office.

Article VI—Powers of the Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Tribal Council of the Colo
rado River Indian Tribes shall exercise the following powers subject 
to any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Constitution of 
the United States, and subject further to all express restrictions upon 
such powers contained m this Constitution and By-laws.

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments, 
on behalf of the Tribe and to advise and consult with representatives 
of the Interior Department on all activities of the Department that 
may affect the Colorado River Indian Tribes.

(b)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the Colorado River Indian Tribes and its members, 
the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To approve, or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets which may 
be authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, or any other official or agency of gov
ernment, provided that no tribal lands shall ever be encumbered, 
or sold, or leased for a period exceeding five years, except that leases 
for mining purposes may be made for such longer periods as may 
be authorized by law.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Colorado River Indian Tribes prior to the submission of such esti
mates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To make assignments of tribal land to members of the Colo
rado River Indian Tribes in conformity with Article VIII of this 
Constitution.

(f)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Colo
rado River Indian Tribes in accordance with the terms of a charter 
which may be issued to the Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior.
(g)  To create and maintain a Tribal Council Fund by accepting 
grants or donations from any person, State, or the United States, or 
by community enterprises, or by levying assessments of not less than 
ten cents nor more than one dollar per year per capita on the quali
fied voters of the tribe; and to require the performance of commu
nity labor in lieu thereof, or by levying taxes and license fees, subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, upon non-members doing 
business within the reservation.

(h)  To administer any funds or property within the control of 
the Tribe; to make expenditures from available funds for tribal pur
poses, including salaries or remuneration of tribal officials or em
ployees, such salaries or remuneration to be paid only for services 
authorized in a regular and legal manner and actually rendered All 
expenditures from the Tribal Council Fund shall be by resolution 
duly approved by a majority of the Council and the amounts so 
expended shall be a matter of public record at all times.

(i)  To require individual members of the Tribe, or other Indian 
residents on the reservation to assist with community labor when 
just cause or extreme emergency arises.
. (j) To promulgate ordinances providing for the removal or ex
clusion from the reservation of any non-members whose presence 
may be injurious to the members of the Tribe, but this power shall 
not extend to the removal or exclusion of government officials, or 
other persons occupying reservation lands under lawful authority 
and in all cases this power may be exercised only with the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior.

(k)  To promulgate ordinances for the safeguarding of the peace 
and safety of the residents of the reservation, including the estab
lishment of courts for the adjudication of claims or disputes arising 
among members of the Tribe, and for the trial and penalizing of 
members of the Tribe charged with the commission of offenses set 
forth 111 such ordinances.

(l)  To regulate domestic relations of tribal members through 

appropriate ordinances and to secure the enforcement thereof.

(m)  To regulate inheritance of property, real and personal, ex
cept allotted lands within the reservation, subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(n)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinances or resolutions, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(o)  To make rules and regulations for the conduct of all elec

tions provided for under this Constitution.

(p)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Council 
itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials within its 
jurisdiction.

(q) To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and regulate the activities of all cooperative associations of mem
bers of the Colorado River Indian Tribes by ordinances, providing 
that any such ordinance shall be subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior.

(r)  To encourage and preserve the arts, crafts, culture, and tra

ditions of the Colorado River Indian Tribes.

(s)   To delegate to subordinate boards or officials, or to cooperative 

associations, open to all members of the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review 
any action taken by virtue of such delegated powers.

Section 2. Future Powers.—The Tribal Council of the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes may exercise such further powers as may in 
the future be delegated to the Council by members of the Tribe 
or by the Secretary of the Interior, or any other duly authorized 
official or agency of the State or Federal Government.

Section 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the Colorado River 
Reservation, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution shall 
not be abridged by this Article, but may be exercised by the people 
of the Colorado River Indian Tribes through the adoption of ap
propriate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Section 4. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance 
which, by the terms of this Constitution, is subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the superintendent of 
the reservation, who shall, within ten days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement to the Secre
tary of the Interior, who may. within ninety (90) days from the 
date of enactment rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any 
cause by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within ten days after its enactment, 
he shall advise the Tribal Council of his reasons therefor. If these 
reasons appear to the Tribal Council insufficient, it may, by a major
ity vote refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of its 
enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordi
nance or resolution shall become effective.

Article VII—Popular Participation in Government

Section 1.  All regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be 
open to members of the Tribe, but visitors may speak only with the 
consent of the Chairman.

Section 2.  All resolutions and ordinances of the Tribal Council 
shall be in writing and posted in public places for the information 
of the members of the Tribe.

Article VIII—Land

 Section 1. Allotted Lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands within the Colorado River Reservation, shall continue to be 
held as heretofore by their present owners. It is recognized that 
under existing law such lands may be condemned for public pur
poses, such as roads, public buildings, or other public improvements, 
upon payment of adequate compensation, by any agency of the State 
of Arizona, or California, or of the Federal Government, or by the 
Tribe itself. It is further recognized that under existing law, such 
lands may be inherited by the heirs of the present owner, whether 
or not they are members of the Tribe. Likewise, it is recognized 
that under existing law the Secretary of the Interior may, in his 
discretion, remove restrictions upon such land, upon application by 
the Indian owner, whereupon the land will become subject to State 
taxes and may then be mortgaged or sold. The right of the indi
vidual Indian to hold or to part with his land, as under existing law, 
shall not be abrogated by anything contained in the Constitution, but 
the owner of restricted land may, with the approval of the Secretary

 of the Interior voluntarily convey his land to the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes either in exchange for a money payment or in 
exchange for an assignment covering the same land or other land, as 
hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Tribal Lands.—The unallotted lands of the Colorado 
River Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by 
the Colorado River Indian Tribes or by the United States in trust 
for the Tribe, shall be held as tribal lands, and no part of such land 
shall be mortgaged or sold Tribal lands shall not be allotted to 
individual Indians, but may be assigned to members of the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes, or leased, or otherwise used by the Tribe as 
hereinafter provided.

Section 3. Leasing of Tribal Lands.—Tribal lands may be leased 
by the Council with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
for such periods of time as are permitted by law.

(a) In the leasing of tribal lands, preference shall be given, first, 
to Indian cooperative associations, and secondly, to individual In
dians who are members of the Tribe.
(b) lease of tribal lands to a non-member should be made by
the Tribal Council unless it shall appear that no Indian cooperative 
association or individual member of the Tribe is able and willing to 
use the land and to pay a reasonable fee for such use.

Section 4. Grant of Standard Assignments.—In any assignment 
of tribal lands which are now owned by the Tribe or which here
after may be acquired for the Tribe by the United States or pur
chased by the Tribe out of tribal funds, preference shall be given, 
first, to heads of families which have no allotted lands or interests 
m allotted lands.

No allotted member of the Colorado River Indian Tribes, who may 
hereafter have the restrictions upon his land removed, and whose 
land may thereafter be alienated, shall be entitled to receive an 
assignment of land as a landless Indian.

The Council, if it sees fit, may charge a fee of not to exceed $5.00 

on approval of an assignment made under this section.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary pur
pose of establishing homes for landless Indians, and shall be known 
as “standard” assignments.

 Section 5. Tenure of Standard Assignments.—If any member of 
the Tribe who holds a standard assignment of land shall, for a period 
of two (2) years, fail to use the land so assigned or use such land 
for any unlawful purposes, his assignment may be cancel ed by the 
Council after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, and the 
said land may be reassigned in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 4 of this Article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a standard assignment, his 
heirs or other individuals designated by him, by will or by written 
request, shall have a preference m the reassignment of the land, 
provided such persons are members of the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes who would be eligible to receive a standard assignment.

Section 6. Grant of Exchange Assignments.—Any member of the 
Tribe who owns any restricted or unrestricted land or any interest 
therein may with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior vol
untarily transfer his interest in such land to the Tribe in exchange 

.

for an assignment to the same or other land of equal value. If the 
assignee prefers, he may receive, in lieu of a specific tract of land, 
a proportionate share in a larger grazing unit.

Assignments made under this section shall be known as exchange 

assignments. 

Section 7. Leasing of Exchange Assignments.—Exchange assign
ments may be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian co
operative associations, to individual members of the Tribe, or if no 
individual Indian or Indian cooperative association is able and will
ing to rent the land at a reasonable fee, such assignments may be 
leased to non-Indians, in the same manner as allotted lands.

Section 8. Inheritance of Exchange Assignments.—Upon the
death of the holder of any exchange assignment, such land shall be 
reassigned by the Council to his heirs or devisees, subject to the fol
lowing conditions:

(a) Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or devisees who 
are not members of the Tribe, except that a life assignment may be 
made to the surviving widower or widow of the holder of an 
assignment.

(b) Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
already holds more than an economic unit of grazing land or other 
land or interest 111 land of equal value, to be determined from time 
to time by the Council.

(c)  Such lands may not be subdivided among heirs or devisees 
into units too small for convenient management. No area of graz
ing land shall be subdivided into units smaller than 160 acres, and 
no area of agricultural land shall be subdivided into units smaller 
than two and one-half (2 1/2) acres, except that land used for build
ings or other improvements may be divided to suit the convenience 
of the parties. Where it is impossible to divide the land properly 
among the eligible heirs or devisees, the Council shall issue to such 
heirs or devisees, interests in tribal land or property of the same 
value as the assignment of the decedent.

(d) If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the provi
sions of Section 4 of this Article.

Section 9. Inheritance of Improvements.—Improvements of any 
character made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and in
herited by members of the Tribe or otherwise disposed of under such 
regulations as the Council shall provide. No permanent improve
ments shall be removed from the land without the consent of the 
Council.

Section 10. Exchange of Assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Colorado River Indian Tribes by 
common consent in such manner as the Council shall designate.

Section 11. Use of Unassigned Tribal Land.—Tribal land which 
is not leased or assigned, including tribal timber reserves, shall be 
managed by the Tribal Council for the benefit of the members of the 
entire tribe, and any cash income derived from such land shall accrue 
to the benefit of the Tribe as a whole. All action of the Tribal 
Council with respect to such lands shall be in conformity with De
partmental regulations for protection of Indian range and timber 
resources authorized by Section 6 of the Act of June 18, 1934.
 
 

 
 
 Section 12. Purchase of Land by Tribe—Tribal funds may be 
used, with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire 
land, under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within the Colorado River Reservation or adjacent to 
the boundaries thereof which is not now in Indian ownership may 
be purchased by or for the Colorado River Indian Tribes.

(b)  Restricted land, which is in heirship status at the time of 
the adoption and approval of this Constitution, may be purchased by 
or for the Tribe, with the consent of all the adult heirs and the 
legal guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as may 
be agreed upon.

(c) Land owned by any member of the Tribe who is over the age 
of sixty (60) years, or who is physically incapacitated, may be trans
ferred by its owner to the Tribe in exchange for a pension of not 
more than twice the annual rental value of the land for the life of the 
pensioner, to be paid out of available funds of the Tribe.

(d)  Land owned by any member of the Tribe in excess of 80 acres 
of agricultural land or a proportionate area of other land may be 
purchased by the Tribe, with the consent of the owner, payments to 
be made under such terms as may be agreed upon.

(e) Land owned by any member of the Tribe who desires to leave 
the reservation permanently, may be purchased by the Tribe, under 
such terms as may be agreed upon.

Section 13. Method of Making Assignments.—Applications for as
signments shall be filed with the Secretary of the Council, and shall 
be in writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons apply
ing for the land, and as accurate a description of the land desired as 
the circumstances will permit Notices of applications received by 
the Secretary shall be posted by him in the agency office and in at 
least three other conspicuous places on the reservation for not less 
than twenty (20) days before action is taken by the Council. Any 
member of the Tribe wishing to. oppose the granting of an assign
ment shall do so in writing, setting forth his objections, to be filed 
with the Secretary of the Council, and may if he so desires, appear 
before the Council to present evidence. The Secretary of the Council 
shall furnish the superintendent or other officers in charge of the 
agency, a complete record of all action taken by the Council on 
applications for assignments of land, and a complete record of 
assignments shall be kept in the agency office and shall be open for 
inspection by members of the Tribe.

The Council shall draw up one or more forms for standard and 
exchange assignments, which shall be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

Article IX—Referendum

Section 1. Upon a petition of at least one-third (1/3) of the eli
gible voters of the Colorado River Indian Tribes or upon the re
quest of a majority of the members of the Tribal Council any 
enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution shall be submitted to 
popular referendum and the vote of a majority of the qualified 
voters in such referendum shall be conclusive and binding on the 

Council, provided that at least 30 per cent of the eligible voters shall 
vote m such election.

Article X—Amendments

Amendments to the Constitution and By-laws may be ratified and 

approved in the same manner as this Constitution and By-laws.

Whenever the Tribal Council shall, by a vote of six or more mem
bers, call for the submission of an amendment, the Secretary of the 
Interior shall call an election upon the proposed amendment. It at 
such election the amendment is adopted by a majority vote of the 
qualified voters of the Tribe voting therein and if at least thirty 
per cent of those entitled to vote, vote in such election, such amend
ment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior and if 
approved by him, shall thereupon take effect.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE COLORADO RIVER INDIAN TRIBES

 
 Article I—The Tribal Council

Section 1. The Chairman of the Council shall preside over all 
meetings of the Council, perforin all duties of the chairman and 
exercise any authority detailed to him by the Council.

Section 2. The Vice-Chairman shall assist the Chairman when 
called on to do so, and in the absence of the Chairman shall preside 
and when so presiding shall have all the privileges, duties, and 
responsibilities of the Chairman.

Section 3. The Secretary shall forward a copy of the minutes of 
all meetings to the Superintendent of the Colorado River Indian 
Agency, and shall perform other such duties as may be required of 
the office.

Section 4. The Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall accept, re
ceive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all funds in the custody 
of the Council, whether same be tribal funds or special funds for 
which the Council is acting as trustee or custodian. He shall deposit 
all funds in such bank or elsewhere as directed by the Council and 
shall make and preserve a faithful record of such funds and shall 
report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature 
of all funds in his possession or custody, such report being made in 
writing to the Council at regular meetings and at such other times 
as requested by the Council.

(a)  He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his 
possession or custody, or m the possession or custody of the Tribal 
Council, except when properly authorized to do so by resolution duly 
passed by the Council.

(b)  The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at 
least once each year by a competent auditor employed by the Council 
and at such other times as the Council or the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs may direct.

(c)  The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to 
the Council, and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, except that 
until he has been bonded, the Council may make such provision for 
the custody and disbursement of funds as shall guarantee their safety 
and proper disbursement and use.

Article II—Qualifications for Officers

Any person to be elected as a councilman or officer must be a 
member of the Colorado River Indian Tribes, a resident of the Colo
rado River Reservation, and over twenty-five years of age at the 
time of his or her election. The Tribal Council shall be the sole 
judge of the qualifications of its own members.

Article III—Installation of Councilmen

Newly elected members of the Council who have been duly certi
fied shall be installed at the first regular meeting of the Tribal 
Council following the election upon subscribing to the following 
oath:

“I,______________________________, do solemnly swear that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; that I will carry out faithfully and impartially, the duties 
of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote, 
and protect the best interests of my tribe, in accordance with the 
Constitution and By-laws of the Colorado River Indian Tribes.”

Article IV—Conduct of Elections and Certification

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the Council to see that each 
nomination for tribal office, including membership 111 the Council, 
shall be made in strict accord with the provisions of the Constitution, 
and to certify as to the legality of such nomination; otherwise it shall 
be considered illegal and ineffective by the Council.

Section 2.  The Council shall meet the first Saturday of each month 
at 9 o’clock in the morning at some designated place where the official 
records will be kept.

Section 3.  Special meetings of the Council shall be held at such 
times as are designated by the Chairman who shall notify members 
at least twenty-four hours before the date of such meeting.

Section 4.  At any special or regular meeting of the Tribal Council 
two-thirds of the Council members shall constitute a quorum and 
without such a quorum the Chairman shall adjourn the meeting.

Section 5. Special meetings of the Council shall be held upon writ
ten request of three members of the Council or by petition signed by 
one-third of the legal voters of the tribe, such written request to be 
filed with the Chairman or Secretary of the Council who shall notify 
the Council members twenty-four hours before the date of such Coun
cil meeting. 

Section 6. The order of business at any regular or special meet

.

ing of the Tribal Council shall be as follows:

(a)  Call to order by the Chairman.
(b)  Roll Call.
(c)  Reading of minutes of last meeting.
(d)  Unfinished business.
(e)  Reports.
(f) New business.
(g) Adjournment.

Section 7. The Tribal Council may prescribe such salaries and 
expenses for officers or members of the Council as it deems advis
able, from such funds as may be available.

Article V—Public Welfare

Section 1  Community Welfare.
(a)  The Council shall determine in careful manner what consti
tutes just cause for aid or assistance to the indigent members of the 
Tribe, and shall make proper provision for recommendation to proper 
agencies of individuals needing relief.

(b)  The Council shall designate persons who shall administer 
tribal welfare work among the Colorado River Indian Tribes and the 
solicitation and expenditure of welfare funds shall be conducted in 
a systematic manner so that the right to do so may not be abused. 
The Council thereby shall render assistance or aid to the aged, the 
physically handicapped, and all others in actual need of assistance.
(c)  The Council shall at all times endeavor to eliminate the causes 
for indigency, exercising wise and judicious supervision and manage
ment of tribal affairs and so far as possible of the finances of indi
vidual members of the Colorado River Indian Tribes, to the end that 
need, privation, and financial distress may be entirely eliminated 
among the members of the Tribe.

Section 2.  Education.
(a)  The Council shall pass necessary ordinances to promote and 
increase learning and education among the members of the Tribe, 
studying present school system, and recommending plans for improv
ing them to the proper Bureaus or Departments.

(b)  The Council shall enter into negotiations with non-reservation 
schools and procure for the members of the Tribe the highest type of 
educational facilities, to the end that younger members of the Tribe 
shall have every possible economic, social, and cultural advantage. 
 (c) The Council shall encourage and promote among the members 
by every practical means a proper system of education for members 
of all ages in such subjects as home economics, hygiene, child care 
and training, agronomy, farm mechanics, etc., cooperating with state 
and federal departments, and agencies which seek to promote such 
work.

Article VI—Loans

The Tribal Council shall act upon all applications for loans under 
the revolving fund or reimbursable regulations for the purchase of 
property, stock or equipment, or loans to Indians, for the payment 
of tuition tor higher education or trade schools.

Article VII—Tribal Claims

The Tribal Council shall make a thorough survey, research, in
vestigation and study of the history and title of all lands which 
were tribal in character in times past and shall endeavor to reestab
lish the tribal equity, if any, in such lands so as to obtain through 
proper channels just compensation for such lands as it shall find 
to have been unlawfully removed from the jurisdiction of the Tribe 
without just compensation.

Article VIII—Property Regulations

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the Council to pass rules and 
regulations to prevent unauthorized prospecting and mining on any 
land of the reservation and to see that such rules and regulations 
are properly enforced.

Section 2. It shall be the duty of the Council to pass ordinances 
for the control of fishing and hunting upon the reservation such 
ordinances not to be in conflict with any of the Federal Game Laws.
Section 3.  It shall be the duty of the Council to prevent the 
relinquishment of any water rights of the Indians of this reser
vation.

Article IX—Ordinances and Resolutions

Section 1. All final decisions of the Council on matters of gen
eral and permanent interest to the members of the Tribe shall be 
embodied in ordinances. Such ordinances shall be collected and 
published from time to time for the information and education of 
the members of the Tribe.

Section 2. All final decisions of the Council on matters of tem
porary interest (such as action on the tribal budget for a single 
year, or petitions to Congress or the Secretary of the Interior) or 
relating especially to particular individuals or officials (such as 
adoptions of members, instructions for reservation employees or 
rules of order for the Council) shall be embodied 111 resolutions. 
Such resolutions shall be recorded in a special book which shall 
be open to public inspection.

Section 3. All questions of procedure (such as acceptance of 
Committee reports or invitations to outsiders to speak) shall be 
decided by motion of the Council or by the ruling of the Chairman 
if no objection is heard. In all ordinances, resolutions, or motions 
the Council may act by majority vote, but all matters of importance 
shall be fully discussed and a reasonable attempt shall be made to 
secure unanimous agreement.

Section 4. Every ordinance shall begin with the words: “Be it 
enacted by the Tribal Council of the Colorado River Indian Tribes.” 
Every resolution shall begin with the words: “Be it resolved by the 
Tribal Council of the Colorado River Indian Tribes.”

Article X—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws when ratified by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the 
Colorado River Reservation voting at an election called for the 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided at least thirty 
(30) per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, 
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and, if approved, 
shall be effective from the date of approval.

I, Charles West, the Acting Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes of the Colorado River Reservation, Arizona and California.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
by-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes of the Colorado River Reservation.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended: August 3, 1937.

John Collier.

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Acting Secretary of the Interior.

Charles West, 

Washington, D. C., August 13, 1937. 

(seal)
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pusuant to an order, approved July 9,1937 by the Acting Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was submitted 
for ratification to the members of the Colorado River Indian Tribes 
of the Colorado River Reservation, Arizona and California, and was 
on July 17, 1937, duly ratified by a vote of 141 for and 34 against, in 
an election in which over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast 
their ballots, in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganiza
tion Act of June 18, 1934(48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 
June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Wendell Goodman, 
Chairman of Election Board.

Henry Welsh,

Secretary of Election Board.

______  
C. H. Gensler,

Superintendent in Charge.

