 
  
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
of the  
 
COLORADO RIVER INDIAN TRIBES 
 
 of the  
 
COLORADO RIVER INDIAN RESERVATION 
ARIZONA AND CALIFORNIA


[NOTE: Pursuant to an election authorized by the Secretary of the Interior on 
September 25, 1974, the Constitution and Bylaws of the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes was submitted to the qualified voters of the Tribes and was on March 1, 
1975 duly adopted by a vote of 184 for and 54 against, in an election in which 
at least thirty (30) percent of the 483 members entitled to vote cast their 
ballot, in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 
378), 25 U.S.C.  476.

Morris Thompson, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, pursuant to authority 
granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 
984), as amended, 25 U.S.C.  476 and redelegated to the Commissioner by 
230 DM 1.1, approved the Constitution and Bylaws of the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes on May 29, 1975.]
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the Colorado 
River Indian Reservation, in order to make the government established by the 
original constitution and bylaws approved August 13, 1937, a more responsive 
legal tribal organization and to secure all privileges and powers offered to us by 
the Indian Reorganization Act, establish justice, promote the general welfare, 
safeguard our interests, encourage educational progress, conserve and develop 
our lands and resources, and to secure the blessings of freedom and liberty for 
ourselves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this constitution and bylaws 
for the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the Colorado River Indian Reservation.
 
 

ARTICLE I

 
 Territory

The jurisdiction of the Colorado River Indian Tribes shall include all the 
territory within the original confines of the Colorado River Indian Reservation 
boundaries as established and approved by the act of March 3, 1865, and lands 
added thereto by Executive Order of November 22, 1873; Executive Order of 
November 16, 1874; Executive Order of May 5, 18761; and Executive Order of 
November 22, 1915, in Arizona and California and to which title has been given 
by Act of the Congress of the United States, Public Law 88-302, of April 30, 
1964, and any other lands in which the Colorado River Indian Tribes acquire

1So in original. Should read May 15, 1876.

ownership, management, use or occupancy by virtue of purchase, gift, Act of 
Congress or otherwise.
 
 

ARTICLE II

 
 Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Colorado River Indian Tribes shall consist of:

a.  All persons on an official membership roll as of the effective date of 
this constitution and bylaws, to be prepared by the tribal officials and approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior. Said roll shall contain the names of all persons 
living on the effective date of this constitution and bylaws;

(1)  whose names appear on the official Colorado River Agency 
Census Roll as of January 1, 1937, the January 1, 1938, and January 1, 1939, 
supplements thereto;

(2)  those individuals born on or before August 10, 1961, who are 
descendants of persons named on any of the documents referred to in Section 
1 a. (1) above, regardless of whether those ancestors are living on the effective 
date of this constitution and bylaws;

(3)  those individuals of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Indian blood 
born after August 10, 1961, who are descendants of persons named on any of 
the documents referred to in Section 1 a. (1) above, regardless of whether 
these ancestors are living on the effective date of this constitution and bylaws;

(4)  those who were adopted as members of the tribes on or before 

August 10, 1961; and

(5)  those who were enrolled since August 10, 1961, pursuant to 
Article II of the tribal constitution as amended on that date. Names of persons 
enrolled as members of other tribes, bands or groups of Indians shall not be 
included on the roll. The roll may be corrected at any time by the Tribal 
Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

b.  Every child of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Indian blood born after 
the effective date of this constitution and bylaws [May 29, 1975] to an enrolled 
member of the Colorado River Indian Tribes.
 
 

ARTICLE III

 
 Rights of Members

Section 1. Political Power.

All political power of the Tribes is inherent in the members. This 
constitution and bylaws is the expression of the will of the members and 

enumeration of rights and privileges herein shall not be construed to impair or 
deny others retained by the members.

Section 2. Inherent Rights.

All members of the Colorado River Indian Tribes have certain inherent 
rights, namely, the enjoyment of life, liberty, and the acquiring and ownership 
of possessions, and pursuing happiness and safety. These rights cannot be 
protected unless the members recognize their corresponding obligations and 
responsibilities.

Section 3. Bill of Rights.

All rights secured to the citizens of the United States of America by the 
Federal or State Constitutions shall not be impaired or abridged by this 
constitution and bylaws. These rights include freedom of religion, speech, the 
press, assembly and petition, a guarantee of due process and equal protection 
under the law, protection from illegal search and seizure, and expeditious trial 
after legal indictment or charge with opportunities for bail and protection 
against excessive punishment, and such other rights as may be protected by 
effective legislation of the Congress of the United States of America. Except as 
otherwise provided by this constitution and bylaws, all members of the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes shall be accorded equal political rights and equal opportunity 
to participate in the economic resources and activities of the tribes.
 
 

ARTICLE IV

 
 Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Colorado River Indian Tribes shall be the 

Colorado River Tribal Council.

Section 2. Composition of Council.

The Tribal Council shall consist of nine (9) members including a chairman 
and vice-chairman, all of whom shall be elected by secret ballot as herein 
elsewhere provided.

Section 3.  Officers.

The Tribal Council shall elect from within its number:

a.  a secretary;

b.  a treasurer, and such other officers other than the chairman and 

vice-chairman, as may be deemed necessary.

Section 4.  Terms.

Except as otherwise expressly provided in this constitution, each member 
of the tribal council, and the chairman and vice-chairman, shall serve for a term 
of four (4) years from the date of his installation in office, or until his successor 
shall have been regularly elected and installed, except if removed for cause as 
provided in Article IX. At the first general election at which a vice-chairman is 
to be elected following the effective date of this constitution, the term of the 
person so elected shall be two (2) years. Upon the expiration of that term and 
thereafter, the term of office of the vice-chairman shall be four (4) years.

Section 5.  Savings Clause.

All duly elected and acting members and officers of the tribal council, 
including the chairman and vice-chairman, under the Constitution of the 
Colorado River Indian Tribes in effect immediately prior to the effective date of 
this constitution and bylaws shall continue to serve in that capacity under this 
constitution until the expiration of their terms of offices as provided for in that 
constitution heretofore in effect, and until their successors are duly elected and 
installed. However, such members and officers of the tribal council shall 
function in their offices subject to the appropriate provisions of this constitution 
from and after its effective date. All ordinances and resolutions adopted by the 
Colorado River Indian Tribes and the tribal council under the Constitution of the 
Colorado River Indian Tribes in effect immediately prior to the effective date of 
this constitution and bylaws shall continue in force after the effective date 
hereof until and unless they are duly amended, modified or repealed hereunder, 
provided, they are not in conflict with any provisions of this constitution in 
which instance they shall be considered invalid from the effective date of this 
constitution.

Section 6. Regular Meeting.

The tribal council shall meet the second Saturday of each month at nine 
o'clock in the morning at the Tribal Administration Center. If this date should 
fall on a holiday, the meeting will be held on the following Saturday.

Section 7. Special Meetings.

Special meetings of the tribal council shall be held at such times as are 
designated by the chairman or in his absence by the vice-chairman, who shall 
notify the members at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of such 
meeting.

Special meetings of the tribal council shall also be held upon written 
request of three (3) members of the tribal council or by petition signed by 
one-third (1/3) of the enrolled members of the tribes, aged eighteen (18) years 
and older. Such written request shall be filed with the chairman or 
vice-chairman or secretary of the tribal council, who shall notify the tribal 
council members at least twenty-four (24) hours prior to the date of such tribal 
council meetings.

Section 8. Quorum.

At any regular or special meeting of the tribal council, six (6) members 
shall constitute a quorum and without such quorum, the chairman or acting 
chairman shall adjourn the meeting. However, should it be necessary to 
convene meetings when vacancies, as defined in Article IX of this constitution, 
exist prior to their being filled, a quorum shall be two-thirds (2/3) of the 
number of council members remaining in office. All actions of the tribal council 
shall be based upon a majority vote of the members present providing those 
present constitute a quorum.

Section 9. Compensation.

The members of the tribal council including the chairman and vice
chairman shall receive such compensation as designated by tribal council 
resolution.

Section 10. Meetings.

All regular meetings and special meetings of the tribal council shall be 
open to members of the tribes; non-members may attend meetings with 
permission of the tribal council. Visitors may speak only with the consent of the 
chairman.

Section 11. Access to Council Enactments.

All resolutions and ordinances of the tribal council shall be posted within 
fifteen (15) days after passage, for a period of thirty (30) days, at the Tribal 
Administration Center for the information of the members of the tribes.
 
 

ARTICLE V

 
 Suffrage and Elections

Section 1. Voter Qualifications.

Each member of the Colorado River Indian Tribes who has attained the 
age of eighteen (18) years shall have the right to vote, provided he is properly 
registered as provided by an election ordinance adopted by the tribal council in 
accordance with Article IV of the bylaws. The election ordinance may include 
provisions for absentee voting by members of the Tribes otherwise qualified to 
vote who are residents of the Colorado River Indian Reservation temporarily 
absent from the reservation, ill, or physically disabled, but such provisions are 
not required by this constitution. In any election held pursuant to laws or 
regulations of the United States, if absentee voting is required by such laws and 
regulations it shall be provided in accordance therewith.

Section 2. Installations.

Elected candidates shall be installed and shall assume office on the first 
working day after January 1st, or in the event of a special election, they shall 

be installed and shall assume office immediately after certification of the results 
of that special election.

Section 3. Nomination of Candidates.

Any member of the Colorado River Indian Tribes who meets the 
qualifications specified in Article VIII, and whose name is presented at least 
thirty (30) days before the scheduled date of the election to the chairman, vice
chairman, or secretary of the Tribal Council on a petition signed by at least ten 
(10) members of the Tribes over the age of eighteen (18) shall be deemed to 
be nominated as a candidate for the office or position indicated in that petition. 
It shall be the duty of the secretary of the tribal council to post the names of 
all qualified candidates in a public place in the Tribal Administration Center and 
one other public place on the reservation at least twenty-five (25) days prior 
to the scheduled election.

Section 4.  Candidates for Chairman and Vice-Chairman.

Candidates for the offices of chairman and vice-chairman of the Tribal 
Council shall specifically stand for election and be elected to those particular 
offices, individually and independently of all other candidates for any other 
elected office or position.

a.  Any incumbent member of the tribal council who accepts nomination 
as a candidate for election to the office of chairman or vice-chairman shall 
submit his resignation from the tribal council on or before sixty (60) days prior 
to the date of the scheduled election; such resignation to be effective on the 
date of installation in office of those candidates elected at that scheduled 
election, unless the notice of resignation specifies an earlier effective date. 
Such resignation shall be effective notwithstanding the failure of such a person 
to be elected to the office of chairman or vice-chairman for which he was a 
candidate. Upon failure of such a candidate for the office of chairman or 
vice-chairman to submit his resignation from the tribal council within the time 
provided above, he shall be deemed to be disqualified as a candidate for that 
office to which he seeks election, and from election thereto, and his name shall 
not appear on the ballot for that office at the subject election.

b.  Notwithstanding the effective date of such a resolution from the tribal 
council as is provided in sub-section 4. a. of this Article V, the membership 
upon the tribal council to which the resignation is directed shall be deemed to 
be vacant for the purpose of election at the same scheduled election, of a 
successor member of the tribal council to fill the unexpired term of the 
resigning member. Any candidate for election to fill the unexpired portion of 
that term upon the tribal council shall have his candidacy so specifically 
designated, and upon election his term shall be for the balance of that 
unexpired term.

Section 5.  Conduct of Election.

By enactment of an election ordinance the tribal council shall determine 
the procedures and regulations governing elections, in accordance with Article 
IV of the bylaws. The election ordinance shall provide for a board of six 
members to be appointed by the tribal council to supervise the conduct of 
elections and certify the results of elections within one (1) day thereafter.

Section 6. Election Dates.

General elections shall be held in even-numbered calendar years on the 
first Saturday in December. Special elections and referendums shall be on such 
dates as may be designated by the tribal council with any such designations to 
be not less than sixty (60) days prior to the date of election.
 
 

ARTICLE VI

 
 Powers of the Tribal Council

Section 1.  Enumerated Powers.

The tribal council of the Colorado River Indian Tribes may exercise the 
following powers subject to any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the 
Constitution of the United States, and subject further to all express restrictions 
upon such powers contained in the constitution and bylaws.

a. 

To negotiate and/or contract with Federal, State and local 
governments, on behalf of the tribes and to advise and consult with 
representatives of the Interior Department or other Federal agencies on all 
activities of the Department or such agencies that may affect the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes.

b.  To employ accountants and also legal counsel for the protection and 
advancement of the rights of the Colorado River Indian Tribes and its members, 
the choice of counsel and the fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

c.  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of 
yribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets or any pledge of income, 
revenues or receipts derived therefrom which may be authorized or executed 
by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative, and to sell, 
dispose of, lease, borrow on or encumber such lands or assets and pledge such 
income, revenues or receipts, as authorized by law; provided, that all sales or 
tribal trusts lands shall first be authorized by tribal members pursuant to the 
referendum proceedings provided for herein.

d.  To make assignments of tribal lands to members of the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes and distribute tribal income or revenue among the Tribal 
members.

e.  To negotiate and enter into business contracts and ventures, and to 
manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes.

f.  To accept grants or donations of money or property from any persons, 

State or the Unites States, or from community enterprises.

g.  To levy taxes and issue licenses, subject to approval by the Secretary 

of the Interior, upon nonmembers doing business within the reservation.

h.  To administer any funds or property within the control of the tribes, 
to make expenditures from available funds for tribal purposes, including 
salaries, remuneration or expenses of tribal officials or employees, such 
salaries, remuneration or expenses to be paid only for services authorized in a 
regular and legal manner and actually rendered. All expenditures from tribal 
funds shall be by resolution duly approved by a majority vote of a quorum to 
the tribal council and the amounts so expended snail be a matter of public 
record at all times.

i.  To determine all terms and conditions of employment of all persons 

employed by the tribes.

j.  To promulgate ordinances providing for the removal or exclusion from 
the reservation of any nonmember whose presence may be injurious to the 
members of the tribes; but this power shall not extend to the removal of 
government officials, or other persons occupying reservation lands under lawful 
authority.

k.  To promulgate civil and criminal ordinances for the safeguarding of 
peace, order, safety and welfare on the reservation including the establishment 
of courts for the adjudication of claims or disputes and for the trial and 
punishment of those charged with commission of offenses set forth in such 
ordinances.

I.  To establish and maintain an up-to-date code of property and land use 

regulations to be known as the "Land code.”

m.  To regulate domestic relations of Indians on the reservation through 
appropriate ordinances and to secure the enforcement thereof, and provide for 
the appointment of guardians for minors, mental incompetents and the 
adoption of minor children by ordinances or resolutions.

n.  To regulate inheritance of the rights to use or occupy tribally owned 

real property, except allotted lands within the reservation.

o.  To make rules and regulations for the conduct of all tribal elections 

provided for under this Constitution and Bylaws.

p.  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the tribal council 

itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials within its jurisdiction.

q.  To create subordinate or collateral organizations for economic, 
welfare, social, cultural, educational or recreational purposes, and to regulate 
the activities of all cooperative associations of members of the Colorado River 
Indian Tribes by ordinances.

r.  To preserve and encourage the arts, crafts, culture and traditions of 

the Colorado River Indian Tribes.

s.  To purchase or acquire for the Colorado River Indian Tribes through 
gift, grant, litigation or inheritance or any other legal means land or interests 
therein. The tribal council shall have the preferential right of purchase over 
nonmembers on the sale of allotted land within the reservation, provided that 
the Tribes shall meet the highest bona fide offer.

t.  To make appointments for the tribal judicial system pursuant to the 

provisions of Article XII and ordinances enacted pursuant thereto.

u.  To regulate hunting, fishing, camping and recreation on the 

reservation, and to enforce those regulations by appropriate ordinances.

v.  To promulgate ordinances and resolutions to provide for the 
administration of the health, education and welfare of members of the tribes.

w.  To delegate to subordinate or collateral boards, committees of 
officials, or to cooperative associations open to all members of the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes, any of the foregoing powers reserving the right to review 
any action taken by virture of such delegated powers.

x.  To promulgate ordinances and resolutions providing for a loan 
program for the Tribes for the purpose of promoting economic development of 
the group or individuals and to finance corporate or tribal enterprises.

Section 2.  Future Powers.

The tribal council of the Colorado River Indian Tribes may exercise such 
further powers as may be in the future delegated to the tribal council by 
members of the tribes or by the Secretary of the Interior, or any other duly 
authorized official or agency of the state or federal government.

Section 3.  Reserved Powers.

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes of the Colorado River Indian Reservation, but not expressly referred to 
in this constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised 
by the people of the Colorado River Indian Tribes through the adoption of 
appropriate bylaws and constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII

 
 Powers of Officers

Section 1.  Chairman.

a.  The Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the tribal council.

b.  The Chairman shall have the power to cal special meetings of the 

tribal council, subject to the provisions of Article IV, Section 7.

c.  The Chairman shall vote only in case of a tie vote of the Tribal Council 

on any issue.

d.  The Chairman shall be responsible for general supervision of dll Tribal 

employees.

e.  It shall be the responsibility of the Chairman to implement and carry 

out all directives of the tribal council.

f.  It shall also be the responsibility of the Chairman to conduct and 
supervise tribal affairs in accordance with the policies and/or directives of the 
tribal council.

Section 2.  Vice-Chairman.

a.  The Vice-Chairman shall be permitted vote on all issues coming 

before the tribal council.

b.  The Vice-Chairman shall act as Chairman in the absence or inability 

of the Chairman to perform his duties as specified in Section 1 of this article.

c.  The Vice-Chairman shall be ex-officio member of all committees 
appointed by the tribal council and shall keep the tribal council informed of their 
activities.

Section 3. Duties of the Secretary.

a.  The Secretary shall act as Chairman in case of absence or incapacity 

of Chairman and Vice-Chairman.

b.  The Secretary shall be responsible for an accurate record of all 
meetings of the tribal council and other such proceedings as directed by the 
Chairman.

c.  The Secretary shall be responsible to forward a copy of the minutes 
of all meetings to the Superintendent of the Colorado River Indian Agency and 
shall perform all other such duties as may be required of the office by the 
Chairman, Vice-Chairman, and the tribal council.

Section 4. Duties of the Treasurer.

a.  The Treasurer shall act as Chairman in case of absence or incapacity 

of the Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary.

b.  The Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall be responsible to accept, 
receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all funds in the custody of the tribal 
council, whether same be tribal funds or special funds for which the tribal 
council is acting as trustee or custodian. He shall be responsible to deposit all 
funds in such bank or elsewhere as directed by the tribal council and shall be 
responsible to make and preserve a faithful record of such funds and shall be 
responsible to report in writing to the tribal council annually and at such other 
times as requested by the tribal council.

c.  He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his possession 
or custody of the tribal council except when properly authorized to do so by 
resolution duly passed by the tribal council.

d.  The books and records of the treasurer shall be audited at least once 
each year by a competent auditor employed by the tribal council and at such 
other times as the tribal council or tne Commissioner of Indian Affairs may 
direct.

e.  The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the 
tribal council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, except that until he has 
been bonded, the tribal council may make such provision for the custody and 
disbursement of funds as shall guarantee their safety and proper disbursement 
and use.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII

 
 Qualifications of Elected Officials

Section 1. Any person to be elected as a member of the tribal council or as 
Chairman or Vice-Chairman at the time of that election must have attained the 
age of twenty-five (25) years, must be an enrolled member of the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes, and must have maintained a true domicile within the 
exterior boundaries of the Colorado River Indian Reservation and physically and 
continuously resided therein for a period of not less than one (1) year. The 
tribal council shall make the sole determination of the qualifications of its 
members and of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman.
 
 

ARTICLE IX

 
 Vacancies, Removal and Recall

Section 1.  Vacancies.

If a member of the tribal council of the Chairman or Vice-Chairman shall 
die, resign, or cease to maintain a true domicile within the exterior boundaries 
of the Colorado River Indian Reservation and physically and continuously reside 
therein for a period in excess of ninety (90) days, or if such a person shall be 
found guilty while in office of a felony, or of a misdemeanor or other criminal 
offense involving dishonesty or moral turpitude, in any Indian, state for Federal 
court, the tribal council shall deciare the position vacant.

If a member of the tribal council or the Chairman or Vice-Chairman fails 
to attend three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings of the tribal 
council, upon an affirmative vote of not less than five (5) members of the tribal 
council the office of the delinquent person shall be deemed to be vacant.

Section 2.  Removal.

The tribal council may, by an affirmative vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the 
number of council members present at a valid meeting called for removal 
purposes, remove from office any member including the Chairman and Vice
Chairman for neglect of duty or gross misconduct, provided that the accused 
member shall be given full and fair opportunity to confront his accusers and 
reply to any and all charges at a designated tribal council meeting, regular or 
special, and, provided further, that the accused member shall have been given 
a written notice by certified mail of the charges against him at least five (5) 
days before the meeting at which he is to appear.

Section 3.  Recall.

Upon a receipt of a petition signed by the eligible voters of the tribes, at 
least one-third (1/3) of the number of voters who were registered for the last 
regular tribal election, the tribal council shall call a special election to be held 
within thirty (30) days after receiving the petition to call a special election for 
the recall of any member or members of the Tribal Council, including the 
Chairman and Vice-Chairman named in such a petition. In the event that a 
majority of those voting in such election approve of a tribal council member's 
recall from office, the office shall be declared vacant and the tribal council shall 
proceed in the usual manner to hold an election to fill the said vacancy.

The tribal council may, by affirmative vote of at least six (6) of its 
members present at a valid meeting, call for a special election for the recall of 
the Chairman and/or Vice-Chairman of the tribal council, subject to the same 
provisions specified in Section 2 of this article. Any such election shall be called 
and held in the manner specified in this section.

Section 4. Special Elections.

Vacancies on the tribal council, including positions of Chairman and 
Vice-chairman, shall be filled for the remainder or the term by a special election 
called by the tribal council for the purpose of filing the vacancies except as 
provided in sub-section 4b. of Article V. The election shall be held sixty (60) 
days after the vacancy occurs, except in the event that the election day falls on 
a Sunday or holiday; then it shall be held the following day. In the event that 
a vacancy occurs six (6) months or less before the regular general election 
provided for in Article V, Section 6, of this Constitution, the tribal council may 
at its discretion leave the position vacant until that election.
 
 

ARTICLE X

 
 Referendum

Section 1. Upon receipt of a petition signed by the eligible voters of the 
Colorado River Indian Tribes constituting at least one-third (1/3) of the number 
of voters who were registered at the last regular tribal election, or upon the 
request of a majority of the members of the tribal council present at a valid 
meeting, any enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution shall be submitted 
to popular referendum within thirty (30) days, and the vote of a majority of the 
qualified voters in such referendum shall be conclusive and binding on the tribal 
council, provided that at least thirty (30) percent of the registered voters shall 
vote in such election.
 
 

ARTICLE XI

 
 Amendments

Section 1. Whenever the tribal council by an affirmative vote of at least six (6) 
members calls for the submission to the members of the tribes of an 
amendment to this constitution and bylaws, the Secretary of the Interior shall 
be requested to call an election. If the amendment is adopted by a majority 
vote of the registered voters of the tribes voting thereon, and if at least thirty 
(30) percent of the registered voters of the tribes shall vote in such election, 
subject to any procedures or provisions required by federal law or regulations, 
such amendment shall take effect as prescribed by Federal law and regulations 
upon approval by the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE XII

 
 Judiciary

Section 1. Judiciary.

The judiciary power of the Colorado River Indian Tribes shall be vested 
in a tribal court having trial jurisdiction and an appeals court having appellate 
jurisdiction over matters and persons subject to their jurisdiction as provided 
by this constitution and bylaws, the ordinances of the tribes, and the authority 
of the constitution and laws of the United States.

Section 2.  Jurisdiction.

The judicial power of the courts of the Colorado River Indian Tribes shall 
extend to all cases and matters in law and equity arising under this constitution 
and bylaws, and the ordinances of the tribes, subject to any limitations, 
restrictions or exceptions imposed by or under the authority of the Constitution 
or laws of the United States.

Section 3. Trial by Jury.

The trial of all criminal offenses shall be by a jury of not less than three 
(3) jurors, unless a jury trial is waived in writing by the defendant, or all 
defendants if more than one is to be tried at a common trial. If the offense is 
punishable by imprisonment, not less than six (6) jurors shall be allowed as 
provided by the so-called Indian Civil Rights Act.

Section 4. Judicial Code.

The tribal council shall enact a judicial code governing the operation and 
procedures of the judiciary of the tribes and the exercise by it of judicial power.
 
  
  
 

BYLAWS

 
 of the 
 

COLORADO RIVER INDIAN TRIBES

 
 Section 1. Conduct of Meetings.

The order of business at any regular or special meeting of the tribal 

council shall be as follows:

(1)  Call to order by the presiding officer.

(2)  Roll call.

(3)  Reading of the minutes of the last meeting.

(4)  Unfinished business.

(5)  Reports.

(6)  New Business.

(7)  Adjournment.
 
 

ARTICLE II

 
 Enrollment

An office of enrollment and statistics shall be established within the tribal 
government in order to maintain an official roll of members of the Colorado 
River Indian Tribes and to furnish the tribal council and working committees 
with vital statistics on the reservation population. This roll shall be certified by 
the tribal council on a semi-annual basis.
 
 

ARTICLE III

 
 Installation of Councilmen

Newly elected member(s) of the tribal council who have been duly 
certified shall be installed at the time specified in the tribal constitution and 
upon subscribing to the following oath which shall be administered by the tribal 
judge or associate judge.

"I,_______________________ , do solemnly swear that
I will support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States against all enemies; that I will carry out 
faithfully and impartially the duties of my office to the 
best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote, and 
protect the best interests of the Colorado River Indian 
Tribes in accordance with the Constitution and Bylaws 
of the Colorado River Indian Tribes.”
 
 

ARTICLE IV

 
 Conduct of Elections

The tribal council shall develop a set of election regulations to be 
executed by an impartial elected board. Such election ordinance shall be 
reviewed annually and posted ninety (90) days before the date of the election 
and shall provide for registration of voters in advance of election day, secret 
balloting, and a means for settling election disputes.
 
 

ARTICLE V

 
 Ordinances and Resolutions

Section 1.  Ordinances.

All final decisions of the tribal council on matters of general and 
permanent interests to the members of the tribes shall be embodied in 
ordinances. Such ordinances shall be collected and published from time-to-time 
for the information and education of the members of the Tribes.

Section 2.  Resolutions.

All final decisions of the tribal council on matters of temporary interest, 
such as action on the Tribal budget for a single year, or petitions to Congress 
or the Secretary of the Interior, or relating especially to particular individuals 
or officials, such as adoptions of members, instructions for reservation 
employees or rules of order for the tribal council, shall be embodied in 
resolutions. Such resolutions shall be duly executed and recorded in a special 
book which shall be open to inspection by tribal members.

Section 3.  Council Voting Procedure.

All questions of procedure, such as acceptance of committee reports or 
invitations to outsiders to speak, shall be decided by motion of the tribal council 
or by ruling of the Chairman if no objection is heard. In all ordinances, 
resolutions, or motions, the Tribal Council may act by majority vote, 
except as may be expressly provided otherwise in the vonstitution, but all 
matters of importance shall be fully discussed and a reasonable attempt shall 
be made to secure unanimous agreement.

Section 4.  Document Format.

Every ordinance shall begin with the words:

"Be it enacted by the Tribal Council of the Colorado River Indian Tribes."

Every resolution shall begin with the words:

"Be it resolved by the Tribal Council of the Colorado River Indian Tribes 

of the Colorado River Indian Reservation."
 
 

ARTICLE VI

 
 Adoption

The constitution and bylaws shall be effective when and if adopted by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Colorado River Indian Tribes of the 
Colorado River Indian Reservation voting at an election authorized for that 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior or his designee, provided at least thirty 
(30) percent of those eligible to vote shall vote in such election, and upon 
approval by the Secretary of the Interior or his designee. The prior existing 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Colorado River Indian Tribes shall be rescinded 
and of no further force and effect as of the date approval is given.

