 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS
OF THE

CONFEDERATED TRIBES
OF THE

GOSHUTE RESERVATION, UTAH


 
  
  
 APPROVED NOVEMBER 25, 1940 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1941 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE CONFEDERATED 
TRIBES OF THE GOSHUTE RESERVATION, UTAH

PREAMBLE


We, the people of the Goshute Reservation, in order to establish 
justice, promote the common welfare and preserve the advantages of 
self-government, do ordain and establish this constitution.

Article I—Purpose

Our purpose shall be to develop and use our resources, to promote 
and protect the interests of the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute 
Reservation, and to secure and preserve peaceful and cooperative rela
tions with the Office of Indian Affairs, its officers and appointees.

Article II—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute Reser
vation shall extend to the territory within the confines of the Goshute 
Indian Reservation boundaries, as established by Executive Order 
dated March 23, 1914, and to such other lands as may be hereafter added 
thereto.

Article III—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Confederated Tribes of the 

Goshute Reservation shall consist as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census rolls of the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute Reservation as 
of April 1, 1939; Provided, That within one year after approval of 
this Constitution and By-laws, such roll may be corrected by the 
Goshute Business Council of the Confederated Tribes subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(6)  All children bom to any member of the Confederated Tribes 
who is a resident of the reservation at the time of the birth of said 
children.

(c)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census rolls of the Skull Valley Reservation; Provided, That the Skull 
Valley Indians may affiliate hereafter with Confederated Tribes of the 
Goshute Indians.

Sec. 2. The Business Council, with the approval of the Confed
erated Tribes, shall have the power to promulgate ordinances, subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior governing future membership 
and the adoption of new members.

(a) No property rights shall be acquired or lost through membership 

in this organization, except as provided herein,

Article IV—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Confederated Tribes of In
dians of the Goshute Reservation shall consist of the council of five 
members, to be known as the Goshute Business Council. The term of 
office of each councilman shall be three years, except as provided in 
Section 1 (a) of Article V. 

...

Sec. 2. The Business Council so organized shall elect from within its 
own number (1) a chairman, (2) a vice-chairman, and from within 
or without, (3) a secretary, and (4) a treasurer, and may appoint or 
employ such other officers and committees as may be deemed necessary.

Article V—Nominations and Elections

Section 1. The first election of the Business Council hereunder 
shall be called, held and supervised by the Superintendent and the 
present Constitutional Committee within sixty days after ratification 
and approval of this Constitution.

(a) The two candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall 
hold office for three years. The two candidates receiving the next 
highest number of votes shall hold office for two years. The candidate 
receiving the next highest number of votes shall hold office for one 
year, and they shall hold office until their successors are duly elected 
and qualified. After the first election, elections for the Business 
Council shall be called at least sixty days prior to expiration of terms 
of office of Business Council members.

Sec. 2. All recognized members of the Confederated Tribes of the 
Goshute Reservation who are 21 years of age or over, who have main
tained legal residence within the reservation for a period of one year 
immediately prior to election, shall have the right to vote.

Sec. 3. The time and place of voting shall be designated by the 

Business Council.

Sec. 4. All elections shall be by secret ballot to be held in accordance 
with rules and regulations laid down by the Business Council or by an 
election board appointed by the Business Council.

Sec. 5. Any qualified voter may become a candidate for the Busi
ness Council. He shall file notice of his candidacy with the Secretary 
of the Business Council at least fifteen days prior to the election. The 
list of candidates shall be posted by the Secretary of the Business 
Council in at least three conspicuous places within the reservation not 
less than ten days prior to the election.

Sec. 6. The Business Council, or a board appointed by the Council, 
shall certify to the election of the members of the Council within five 
days after election returns.

Article VI—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a councilman or officer shall die, resign, be removed or 
recalled from office, permanently leave the reservation, or shall be 
found guilty of a felony or misdemeanor involving dishonesty in any 
Indian, State, or Federal Court, the Council shall declare the position 
vacant and elect to fill the unexpired term.

Sec. 2. The Business Council may, by four affirmative votes, expel 
any member for neglect of duty or gross misconduct. Before any vote 
for expulsion is taken on the matter, such member or official shall be 
given a written statement of the charges against him at least five days 
before the meeting before which he is to appear and an opportunity to 
answer any and all charges at such designated Council meeting. The 
decision of the Business Council shall be final.

Sec. 3. Recall from, Office.—Upon receipt of a petition signed by at 
least one-third of the eligible voters of the Confederated Tribes of 
the Goshute Reservation calling for the recall of any member of the 
Council, it shall be the duty of the Business Council to call a special 
election to consider the recall of the member or members of the Coun
cil named in such petition. Provided that at least thirty percent of 
those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, and the majority favor 
such recall from office, the office shall be declared vacant and the Busi
ness Council shall proceed in the usual manner to hold an election to 
fill the said office.

Article VII—Powers of the Business Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Business Council of the Con
federated Tribes of the Goshute Reservation shall exercise the follow
ing powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the 
Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments.
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees 

to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
reservation prior to submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 
Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Goshute 
Reservation in accordance with the terms of a charter that may be 
issued to the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute Reservation by the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior governing the conduct of 
members of the Goshute Reservation; providing for the manner of 
making, holding and revoking assignments of tribal land or interests 
therein; providing for the levying of assessments and the appropria
tion of available funds of the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute 
Reservation for public purposes; providing for the licensing of non
members coming upon the reservation for purposes of hunting, fishing, 
trading or other business, and for the exclusion from the territory of 
the reservation of undesirable persons, and establishing proper agen
cies for the enforcement of such ordinances upon the reservation.

Article VIII—Bill of Rights

Section 1. All members of the Confederated Tribes over the age of 
twenty-one years shall have the right to vote in all tribal elections. 

The residence qualifications established by Article V, section 2, of this 
Constitution shall apply to all elections.

Sec. 2. All members of the Confederated Tribes shall be accorded 
equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources and activi
ties of the reservation.

Sec. 3. All members of the Confederated Tribes may enjoy without 
hindrance freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, and 
association.

Sec. 4. Any member of the Confederated Tribes accused of any 
offense shall have the right to a prompt, open, and public hearing, with 
due notice of the offense charged, and shall be permitted to summon 
witnesses on his own behalf. Trial by jury may be demanded by any 
prisoner accused of any offense punishable by more than 30 days’ im
prisonment. Excessive bail shall not be required and cruel punish
ment shall not be imposed.

Article IX—Land

Section 1. Tribal lands.—The lands of the Goshute Reservation, 
and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the Confederated 
Tribes of the Goshute Reservation, or by the United States in trust 
for the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute Reservation, shall be held 
as tribal lands and shall be used in accordance with a land-use agree
ment entered into between the Tribes and the Secretary of the Interior, 
and no part of such lands shall be mortgaged or sold. Tribal lands 
shall not be allotted to individual Indians, but may be assigned to 
members of the Confederated Tribes, or otherwise used by the Tribes, 
as specified in the land-use agreement or as hereinafter provided, ex
cept that no assignment shall be made on grazing land.

Sec. 2. Grant of "Standard” Assignments.—In any assignment of 
tribal agricultural lands, which are now owned by the Tribes or which 
hereafter may be acquired for the Tribes by the United States or pur
chased by the Tribes out of tribal funds, preference shall be given to 
heads of families which have no land or interests in lands. The Busi
ness Council may, if it sees fit, charge a filing fee of not to exceed $5.00 
on approval of an assignment made under this Section.

Assignments made under this Section shall be for the primary pur
pose of establishing homes for landless members, and shall be known 
as "Standard” assignments.

Sec. 3. Tenure of Standard Assignments.—If any member of the 
Confederated Tribes holding a standard assignment of land shall, for 
a period of two years, fail to use the land so assigned in accordance 
with his application or contract, or shall use such land for any un
lawful purposes, his assignment shall be cancelled by the Business 
Council after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, and the said 
land may be reassigned in accordance with the provision of this Article.
Upon the death of any Indian holding a Standard Assignment, his 
heirs or other individuals designated by him by will or by written re
quest, shall have a preference in the reassignment of the land, provided 
such persons are members of the Confederated Tribes who would be 
eligible to receive a Standard Assignment.

Sec. 4. Inheritance of Improvements.—Improvements of any char
acter made upon assigned land by an assignee may be bequeathed to and 

inherited by members of the Confederated Tribes or otherwise disposed 
of under such regulations as the Business Council shall provide. No 
permanent improvements shall be removed from the land without the 
consent of the Business Council.

Sec. 5. Exchange of Assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Confederated Tribes by common con
sent in such manner as the Business Council shall designate.

Sec. 6. Use of Unassigned Tribal Lands.—Tribal agricultural land 
which is not assigned and tribal timber and grazing lands shall be 
managed by the Business Council for the benefit of the members of the 
entire Confederated Tribes, and any cash income derived from such 
land shall accrue to the benefit of the Tribes as a whole. All action of 
the Business Council with respect to such lands shall be in conformity 
with departmental regulations for the protection of Indian range and 
timber resources authorized by Section 6 of the Act of June 18, 1934.
Sec. 7. Purchase of Land by the Tribes.—Tribal funds may be used 
with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire land, 
under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within the jurisdiction of the Tribes, or adjacent to the 
boundaries thereof, which is not now in Indian ownership, may be 
purchased by or for the Confederated Tribes.

(b)  Any property rights owned by any member of the Confederated 
Tribes who desires to leave the reservation permanently, may be pur
chased by the Tribes, under such terms as may be agreed upon.

Sec. 8. Method of Making Assignments.—Applications for assign
ments shall be filed with the Secretary of the Business Council and shall 
be in writing on approved forms, setting forth the name of the person 
or persons applying for the land and as accurate a description of the 
land desired as the circumstances will permit. Notice of all applica
tions received by the Secretary shall be posted by him in the Agency of
fice and in at least three conspicuous places on the reservation for not 
less than twenty days before action is taken by the Business Council. 
Any member of the Tribes wishing to oppose the granting of an assign
ment shall do so in writing, setting forth his objections, to be filed with 
the Secretary of the Business Council, and may, if he so desires, appear 
before the Council to present evidence. The Secretary of the Business 
Council shall furnish the Superintendent or other officer in charge of 
the Agency a complete record of all action taken by the Council on 
applications for assignment of land, and a complete record of assign
ments shall be kept in the Agency office and shall be open for inspection 
by members of the Tribe.

The Business Council shall draw up Standard Assignment forms 
which shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Article X—Referendum

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least one-third of the eligible 
voters of the Confederated Tribes, or upon the request of a majority 
of the members of the Business Council, any enacted or proposed 
ordinance or resolution of the Council shall be submitted to a popular 
referendum and the vote of the majority of the qualified voters voting 
in such referendum shall be conclusive and binding on the Business 
Council; Provided, That at least 30 percent of the eligible voters shall 

vote in such election and provided further that all enacted ordinances 
and resolutions shall be in effect until rescinded by the Council or by 
a referendum of the Tribes.

Article XI—Amendments

Amendments to the Constitution and By-laws may be ratified and 
approved in the same manner as this Constitution and By-laws. 
Whenever the Business Council shall by a vote of four or more mem
bers call for the submission of an amendment, the Secretary of the 
Interior shall call for an election upon the proposed amendment. If at 
such election the amendment is adopted by a majority of the qualified 
voters of the Tribes voting thereon, and if at least 30 percent of those 
entitled to vote shall vote in such election, such amendment shall be 
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior and if approved by him, 
shall thereupon take effect.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE GOSHUTE 
RESERVATION

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman of the Business Council.—The Chairman of 
the Business Council shall preside over all meetings of the Council 
and the Tribes. He shall perform all duties of a chairman, and ex
ercise any authority delegated to him by the Tribes and the Business 
Council. He shall vote only in the case of a tie.

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman of the Business Council.—The Vice-Chair
man shall assist the Chairman when called upon to do so, and in the 
absence of the Chairman he shall preside. When so presiding, he 
shall have all the rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of the 
Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary of the Business Council.—The Secretary of the 
Business Council shall conduct all tribal correspondence, and shall 
keep an accurate record of all matters transacted at tribal and Business 
Council meetings. It shall be his duty to submit promptly to the 
Superintendent of the jurisdiction, and to the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, copies of all minutes of regular and special meetings of the 
Tribes and the Business Council.

Sec. 4. Treasurer of the Business Council.—The Treasurer of the 
Business Council shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve, and safe
guard all funds in the custody of the Business Council, whether same 
be tribal funds or special funds for which the Business Council is act
ing as trustee or custodian. He shall deposit all funds in such bank 
or elsewhere as directed by the Business Council, and shall make and 
preserve a faithful record of such funds, and shall report on all receipts 
and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds in his pos
session or custody, such report being made in writing to the Business 
Council at regular meetings and at such other times as requested by the 
Business Council and the Tribes.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his posses
sion or custody, or in the possession or custody of the Business Council, 
except when properly authorized to do so by resolution duly passed by 
the Business Council.

The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least once 
each year by a competent auditor employed by the Business Council, or 
an employee of the Department of the Interior, and at such other times 
as the Tribes, the Business Council, or the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs may direct.

The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the 

Business Council, and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

The Treasurer shall be present at all special and regular meetings of 

the Tribes and the Business Council.

Sec. 5. Appointive Officers.—The duties of all appointive commit
tees or officers of the Confederated Tribes shall be clearly defined by 
resolution of the Business Council at the time of their creation or ap
pointment. Such committees and officers shall report, from time to 
time as required, to the Business Council, and their activities and 
decisions shall be subject to review and approval by the Business 
Council.

Article II—Qualifications of Councilmen

No person shall be a candidate for membership in the Business 
Council unless he shall be a member of the Confederated Tribes and 
shall have resided within the reservation for a period of one year next 
preceding the election and be at least twenty-four years of age.

Article III—Installation of Councilmen

Each member of the Business Council and each officer or subordinate 
officer elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an oath of office prior 
to assuming the duties thereof by which oath he shall pledge himself 
to support and defend the Constitution of the United States and this 
Constitution and By-laws. The following form of oath of office shall 
be given:

“I,___________________ , do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; that I will carry out faithfully and impartially the duties of 
my office to the best of my ability, and will cooperate, promote, and 
protect the best interests of my people in accordance with this 
Constitution and By-laws.”

Article IV—Salaries

The Business Council may prescribe such salaries of officers and 
members of the Council as it deems advisable from such funds as may 
be available; Provided, That no compensation shall be paid to any of
ficers and members of the Business Council except upon a resolution 
passed by the Council stating the amount of compensation and the 
nature of services rendered, and said resolution shall be of no effect 
until approved by a majority of the members of the Tribes of the 
Goshute Reservation.

Article V—Time and Place of Regular Meetings and Procedure

Section 1. Meetings.—Regular meetings of the Business Council 
shall be held on the second Thursday of each quarter, and at such other 
times as the Business Council may by resolution provide. Special 

meetings may be called by a written notice signed by the Chairman or 
by a majority of the Business Council, and when so called, the Council 
shall have power to transact business as in regular meetings.

Sec. 2. Meetings of the Tribes.—The Chairman of the Business Coun
cil shall call a meeting of the Tribes annually, this meeting to be held on 
the first Thursday of December, at which time he shall report in detail 
to the Tribes what has been done during the past year and set forth the 
plans of the Business Council for the coming year. This shall be freely 
discussed by the Indians at the tribal meeting and the wishes of the peo
ple may be expressed by resolution which shall govern the future action 
of the Business Council to be carried into effect by appropriate ordi
nances. The Chairman may call special meetings of the Tribes when 
necessary, and shall do so upon a petition of at least 25 legal voters.

Sec. 3. Quorum.—No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is 
present. A quorum shall consist of four councilmen. A quorum of 
the Tribes shall consist of 25 percent of the eligible voters.

Sec. 4. Order of Business.—The following order of business is es

tablished for all meetings:

1.  Call to order by the chairman
2.  Roll call
3.  Ascertainment of a quorum
4.  Reading the minutes of the last meeting
5.  Adoption of the minutes by vote or common consent
6.  Unfinished business
7.  New business
8.  Adjournment

Sec. 5. Legislative Forms.—Every ordinance shall begin with the 

words: "Be it enacted by the Goshute Business Council------”,

Every resolution shall begin with the words: “Be it resolved by the 

Goshute Business Council----- ”.

Every ordinance and resolution shall contain the provisions of the 
Constitution for the Confederated Tribes of the Goshute Reservation 
under which authority for the said ordinance or resolution is found.

Article VI—Ratification of Constitution and By-laws

This Constitution and By-laws shall be in full force and effect when
ever a majority of the adult voters of the Confederated Tribes of the 
Goshute Reservation voting at an election called by the Secretary of 
the Interior in which at least 30 percent of the eligible voters shall 
vote, shall have ratified such Constitution and By-laws, and the Secre
tary of the Interior shall have approved same, as provided in the Act of 
June 18,1934, as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 25, 1940, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Confederated Tribes 
of the Goshute Reservation and was on November 9, 1940, duly rati
fied by a vote of 42 for, and 7 against, in an election in which more than 
30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with 

section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 
984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Arthur Johnson, 
Chairman, Election Board.

Bob Steele,

Secretary, Election Board.

Carl W. Beck,

Supt., Western Shoshone Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and by-laws of the Confederated Tribes of 
the Goshute Reservation in Utah.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be in
compatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
by-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the members of the Con
federated Tribes of the Goshute Reservation.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended: November 18, 1940.

Fred H. Daiker,

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., November 25, 1940.

