DATE DOWNLOADED: Wed Jun 8 20:08:53 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of 
Oregon (including Amendments) (1973).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution & Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of 
Oregon (including Amendments) (1973).

APA 7th ed.
(1973). Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs 
Reservation of Oregon (including Amendments). S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of 
Oregon (including Amendments). S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution & Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of
Oregon (including Amendments) (S.I.: s.n., 1973)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of
Oregon (including Amendments) (s.n., 1973

MLA 9th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of 
Oregon (including Amendments). S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of 
Oregon (including Amendments). S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at 
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.


CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE 
WARM SPRINGS RESERVATION 
OF OREGON


 
  
 (including amendments) 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon, 
in order co establish a more responsible and effective organization Ito 
promote our general welfare, conserve and develop our lands and other 
resources, and secure to ourselves and our posterity :he power to exer
cise certain rights of self-government not inconsistent with existing 
Federal and State laws, do ordain and establish this Constitution of 
the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon.
 
 

ARTICLE I - OBJECTIVES

 
 It shall be the object of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs
Reservation of Oregon:

(a) 

To establish and maintain, with the aid of the Federal 

Government, a form of home rule that shall promote the advancement 
and welfare of the Indians of the Warm Springs Reservation.

(b) 

To establish and enforce such rules as may be necessary to 

safeguard Indian property and resources for the use of present and 
future generations.

(c) 

To obtain for all Indians of this reservation of the present 

and future generations lands needed for homes and livelihood.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs 
Reservation of Oregon shall extend to all lands contained withip the 
present boundaries of the Warm Springs Reservation and to such lands 
as may have been heretofore or may hereafter be acquired by the 
Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation or by the United 
States in trust for such tribes.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Membership of Allottees. Every living person whose name 
appears on the allotment roll of the Warm Springs Reservation of 
Oregon, shall be entitled to membership in the Confederated Tribes 
of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon; Provided, that the tribal 
council shall have authority, subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior, within one year from the approval of this constitution, 
to make corrections in said roll to the end that it may be an accurate 
record of the membership of the tribe.

Sec. 2. Membership of Descendants

(a)  Every child of one-fourth or more blood of the Confederated 

Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation born after the effective date 
of this amendment to any member of the Confederated Tribes who main
tains a residence upon the Warm Springs Reservation at the time of 
such birth shall automatically be entitled to membership in the 
Confederated Tribes. (Amendment VIII, approved April 7, 1966.)

(b)  Children born heretofore or hereafter to a member or former 

member of any of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation 
may be adopted as provided in Section 3 of this article, upon application 
by self, parent or guardian.

Sec. 3. Adoption. The members of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm 
Springs Reservation, may by a majority vote of the qualified voters 
of the Confederated Tribes voting at an election called for that pur
pose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided at least 50 percent of 
those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, adopt as a member 
of the tribe any person of 1/8 or more Indian blood who is a descendant 
of a member or former member of the Confederated Tribes; Provided, 
that any person adopted into membership must have resided at least 
three years upon the Warm Springs Reservation immediately prior to 
the date of his application for adoption, and shall net be a member 
of any other tribe of Indians. (Amendment I, approved May 15, 1940.)

Sec. 4. Loss of Membership. In no case shall a member lose his 
membership other than by personal request in writing to the tribal 
council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - ORGANIZATION OF TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Sec. 1. Composition. The tribal council shall be composed of
members chosen as hereinafter provided. The council shall consist 
of eleven members, to be selected from the districts as set forth 
hereafter.

Sec. 2. Apportionment. Representation from the districts shall be 
as follows: Simnasho District, 3 elected members and the recognized 
chief of the district, or his successors; Agency District, 3 elected 
members, one of whom shall represent the Sidwaller Flat area, together 
with the recognized chief of the district, or his successors; Seekseequa 
District, 2 elected members and the recognized ch|ef of the; district or 
his successors.

Sec. 3. Term of Office. Members of the council shall be elected for 
terms of three years except that the chiefs shall serve for life, and 
their successors shall be selected in accordance with tribal custom.

Sec. 4. First Election. The first election of the: tribal council 
shall be called by the present business committee as soon as possible 
after the adoption and approval of this constitution.

 Sec. 5. Right to Vote. All members of the community of either sex,
who are married, or who are over 21 years of age, are entitled to 
vote in the district in which they reside.

Sec. 6. Time of Election. Elections for membership on the council 
shall be set by the tribal council at least 30 days in advance of 
the expiration of the term of office of the members. Duly elected 
councilmen shall take office on the first regular meeting date of 
Che council following their election.

Sec. 7. Manner of Elections. Elections shall be by secret ballot 
or by prevailing customs, as may be desired by the people of the 
district.

Sec. 8. Vacancies and Removal From Office. If a councilman or official 
shall die, resign, permanently leave the reservation, or be removed 
from office, the council shall declare the position vacant and appoint 
a successor to fill the unexpired term; Provided, that the person chosen 
to fill such vacancy shall be from the district in which the vacancy 
occurs.

Sec. 9. Impeachment. The council may expell a member for cause by 
a 2/3 vote, after due notice of charges and allowing an opportunity 
to be heard.

Sec. 10. Recall. A member of the council may be recalled by the 
electors of his district in an election which shall be called by the 
tribal council upon presentation of a petition for the recall of 
such member signed by at least 30 percent of the eligible voters of 
the district. Successors to recalled councilmen shall be elected.

Sec, 11. Officers. The tribal council shall select from its member
ship, a chairman and vice-chairman, and from within or outside of 
its membership, a secretary-treasurer. It may also select such other 
officers and committees as it may deem necessary for properly con
ducting the business of the council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The Tribal Council of the Warm Springs 
Reservation shall have the following powers the exercise of which 
shall be subject to popular referendum as provided hereafter:
 
 

J 

 
 (a) To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments 

on behalf of the Confederated Tribes and to advise and consult with 
the representatives of the Interior Department on all activities of
the Department of the Interior that may affect the Confederated Tribes 
of the Warm Springs Reservation.

(b)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the Confederated Tribes and its members, the choice 
of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To approve or veto any sale, dispostion, lease, or encumbrance 

of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets which may 
be authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs or any other duly qualified official 
or agency of Government; Provided, that no tribal lands shall ever be
sold except for governmental purposes. (Amendment VIII, approved 
June 22, 1959.)

(d)  To submit through proper Government channels recommendations 

for the expenditure of Federal funds for tribal support, reimbursable 
assistance, reservational improvements, health, education, and other 
necessary activities looking toward the advancement of the members 
of the Confederated Tribes.

(e)  To borrow money from the Federal Government in accordance 

with the terms of a corporate charter to be issued to the Confederated 
Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon.

(f)  To manage the economic affairs of the Confederated Tribes 

and to appropriate available funds for public purposes.

(g)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior, which would provide for assessments 
or license fees upon non-members doing business within the reservation 
This power may also extend to members of the Confederated Tribes, pro
vided such ordinances have been approved by a referendum of the 
Confederated Tribes. (Amendment VI, approved June 22, 1959.)

(h)  To exclude from the territory of the Confederated Tribes 

persons not legally entitled to reside therein under ordinances which 
shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(i)  To establish ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary 

of the Interior governing law enforcement on the reservation, and to 
set up courts for the trial and punishment of offenders against such 
ordinances, in cases that do not fall within the jurisdiction of the 
Federal Court.

(j)  To purchase land of members of the Confederated Tribes 

for public purposes under condemnation proceedings in courts of 
competent jurisdiction. 

.

(k)  To prohibit the overgrazing of lands or other depletion 

of the capital or natural resources of the tribe by ordinances which 
shall be subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior.

(1)  To regulate the uses and disposition of tribal property; 
to protect and preserve the tribal property, wild life and natural 
resources; to cultivate Indian arts, crafts and culture; to admin
ister charity; to protect the health, security and general welfare 
of the members of the Confederated Tribes.

(m)  To regulate the inheritance of real and personal property, 
other than allotted lands, within the territory of tie Confederated 
Tribes.

(n)  To establish ordinances relating to the assignment, use, 
or transfer of tribal lands within the Jurisdiction in conformity 
with Article VIII of this constitution.

(o)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 

and to regulate me activities or all cooperative associations or 
members of the Confederated Tribes.

(p)  To regulate the domestic relations of members of the 

Confederated Tribes.

(q)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors 

and mental incompetents by ordinance or resolution subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(r)  To make recommendations to the Superintendent or the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs or the Secretary of the Interior con
cerning the appointment and removal of employees assigned co duties 
on the Warm Springs Reservation.

(s)  To appoint subordinate boards and tribal officials, and 
to provide for the popular election of subordinate district councils, 
and to delegate to such boards, councils, or officials or to coopera
tive associations which are open to all members of the Confederated 
Tribes, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review 
any action taken by virtue of such delegated powers. 

(t) To appropriate for tribal use of the reservation, any 

available tribal funds; Provided, that any such appropriation 
exceeding $2,500 shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the
Interior; And provided, further, that any appropriation in excess 
of $25,000 in any one fiscal year for any purpose, other than per 
capita payments, shall be of no effect until approved in a popular 
referendum. (Amendment III, approved May 20, 1948.)

(u) To adopt resolutions or ordinances to effectuate any of 

the foregoing powers.

Sec. 2. Manner of Review. Any resolution or ordinance which, by 
the terms of this constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the reser
vation, who shall within ten days thereafter approve or disapprove the 
same. If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary 
of the Interior, who may within 90 days from the date of enactment, 
rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying 
the Confederated Tribes of such rescission.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within ten days after its enactment, he 
shall advise the tribal council of his reasons therefor. If these 
reasons appear to the council insufficient, it may, by a majority 
vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, 
approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or 
resolution shall become effective.

Sec. 3. Future Powers. The Tribal Council of the Warm Springs 
Reservation may exercise, subject to popular referendum, such 
further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Confederated 
Tribes by the Secretary of the Interior, or by any other duly 
authorized official or agency of government.

Sec. 4. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation but not 
expressly referred to in this constitution, shall not be abridged 
by this article, but may be exercised by the members of the 
Confederated Tribes through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and 
constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Whenever a matter of great importance comes before the tribal council, 
the councilmen shall, by resolution duly passed, submit the matter to 
the vote of the people. If they do not so agree to submit the ques
tion, any two members of the council, or one-fifth of the members of 
the Confederated Tribes, may within 30 days after the vote of the 
council, call such a popular referendum, but no councilman shall call 
more than two referendum elections during any calendar year. When a 
referendum election has been called, the question to be voted on shall 
be posted at the voting places for at least ten days prior to election. 
The notice shall contain the ordinance or resolution to be voted on 
with the accompanying words: "Shall the ordinance (or resolution) be 
approved. Yes. (/ /.) No. (/ /.)" The will of the majority of these 
voting shall be the law, provided at least one-third of the eligibly 
voters actually vote.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Confederated Tribes stall be accorded 
equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources and 
activities of the reservation.

Sec. 2. All members of the Confederated Tribes may enjoy without 
hindrance, freedom of worship, speech, press and assembly.

Sec. 3. Any member of the Confederated Tribes accused of any offense, 
shall have the right to a prompt, open and public hearing with due 
notice of the offense charged, and shall be permitted to summon 
witnesses in his own behalf and trial by jury shall be accorded, when 
duly requested by any member accused of any offense punishable by more 
chan 30 days' imprisonment. Excessive bail or cruel or unusual 
punishment shall not be imposed.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - LAND

 
 Section 1. Allotted Lands. Allotted lands, including heirship lands, 
within the Warm Springs Reservation, shall continue to be held as 
heretofore by their present owners. The right of the individual 
Indian to hold or to part with his land, as under existing law, shall 
not be abrogated by anything contained in this constitution, but the 
owner of restricted land may, with the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior, voluntarily convey his land to the Confederated Tribes 
either in exchange for a money payment or in exchange for an assign
ment covering the same land or other land, as hereinafter provided.

The tribal council shall have the right to exchange tribal lands for 
individual allotments when necessary for consolidation of tribal 
holdings and subject to approval of the Secretary of the Interior. 
Such exchanges shall be based on the appraised value of the lands 
so exchanged, and the individual Indian shall hold the land so 
exchanged in the same manner as the original allotment, or as an 
exchange assignment at the option of the owner.

Sec. 2. Tribal Lands. The unallotted lands of the Warm Springs 
Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the 
Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation, or by the 
United States in trust for the Confederated Tribes of the Warm 
Springs Reservation, shall be held as tribal land, end no part of 
such land shall be mortgaged or sold. Tribal lands shall not be 
allotted to individuals, but may be assigned to members of the 
Confederated Tribes, or leased, or otherwise used by the Confederated 
Tribes as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 3. Leasing of Tribal Lands. Tribal lands may be leased by 
the tribal council, with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, for such periods of time as are permitted by law.

In leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given first, to 
Indian cooperative associations, and secondly, to individual Indians 
who are members of the Confederated Tribes. No lease of tribal land 
to a non-member shall be made by the tribal council unless it shall 
appear that no Indian cooperative association or individual member 
of the Confederated Tribes is able and willing to use the land and 
to pay a reasonable fee for such use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the tribal 
council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, in the 
same manner and upon the same terms, as leases.

Sec. 4. Grants of Standard Assignments. In any assignment of tribal 
lands which now are owned by the Confederated Tribes or which may 
hereafter be acquired for the Confederated Tribes by the United States, 
or purchased by the Confederated Tribes out of tribal funds, preference 
shall be given, first, to heads of families which are entirely land
less, and second to members of the Confederated Tribus having allotted 
lands, or interests in inherited lands, which are for one reason or 
another unsuitable for economical use, who may be benefited by exchanging 
such interests for tribal lands suitable for cultivation.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary purpose 
of establishing homes for landless Indians, and for Indians whose pre
sent land holdings are not suitable for economical use.

Tribal land under this section may be assigned by the tribal council 
in economic units, but not in excess of 40 acres of irrigated farm 
land, and 80 acres of pasture land, or 80 acres of dry-farm land and 
80 acres of pasture land to any head of a family. (Amendment II, 
approved May 15, 1940.)

No allotted member of the Confederated Tribes who may hereafter have 
the restrictions upon his land removed and whose lani may thereafter 
be alienated shall be entitled to receive an assignment of lard as 
a landless Indian.

The tribal council may, if it deems advisable, charge a fee of not 
to exceed $5.00 on approval of an. assignment of land made under this 
section.

Sec. 5. Tenure of Standard Assignments. If any member of the 
Confederated Tribes holding a standard assignment of land shall, for 
a period of two years, abandon, or fail to put forth reasonable efforts 
to improve and use beneficially the land so assigned, or shall use 
such land for any unlawful purpose, his assignment may be cancelled 
by the tribal council after he has had due notice and an opportunity 
to be heard, and the said land may be reassigned in accordance with 
the provisions of Section 4 of this article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a standard assignment, his heirs, 
or other individuals designated by him by will or by written request, 
shall have a preference in the reassignment of the land, provided 
such persons are members of the Confederated Tribes who would be 
eligible to receive a standard assignment.

Sec. 6. Grant of Exchange Assignments. Any member of the Confederated 
Tribes who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land, or any 
unencumbered deeded land within the reservation, may voluntarily trans
fer his interests in such land to the Confederated Tribes in exchange 
for an assignment to the same land, or to other lands of equal value, 
as an exchange assignment. If the assignee prefers, he may receive, 
in lieu of a specific tract of land, a proportionate share in a larger 
grazing unit.

Assignments made under this section shall be known as "exchange 
assignments.”

Sec. 7. Leasing of Exchange Assignments. Exchange assignments may 
be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian cooperative 
associations, to individual members of the Confederated Tribes, or 
if no individual Indian or Indian cooperative association is able 
and willing to rent the land at a reasonable fee, such assignments 
may be leased to non-Indians in the same manner as allotted lands.

Sec. 8. Inheritance of Exchange Assignments. Upon the death of the 
holder of an exchange assignment, his land shall be reassigned, by the 
tribal council to his heirs or devisees, subject to the following 
conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or devisees 

who are not members of the Confederated Tribes, except that a, life 
assignment may be made to the surviving widower or widow of the 
holder of an assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be subdivided into units smaller, than 

160 acres of grazing land, and no area of agricultural land shall 
be subdivided into units smaller than two and one-half acres, except 
that land used for buildings or other improvements may be divided 
to suit the convenience of the parties. Where it is impossible to 
divide the land properly among the eligible heirs or devisees', the 
tribal council shall issue to the eligible heirs or devisees, grazing 
permits or ocher interests in tribal lands of the same value as the 
assignment of the decedent.

(c)  Such lands may not be reassinged to any heir or devisee 

who already holds more than 640 acres of grazing land, or other 
land or interests in lands of equal value, either wider allotment 
or under assignment. 

;

(d) 

If there are no eligible heirs of devisees of the decedent, 

the land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the 
provisions of Section 4 of this article. 

'

Sec. 9. Inheritance of Improvements. Improvements of any character 
made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and inherited by mem
bers of the Confederated Tribes, or otherwise disposed of under such 
regulation as the tribal council shall provide. No permanent improve
ments shall be removed from the land without the consent of the tribal 
council.

Sec. 10. Exchange of Assignments. Assignments may be exchanged between 
members of the Confederated Tribes by common consent in such manner as 
the tribal council shall designate.

Sec. 11. Use of Unassigned Tribal Land. Tribal land which is not 
assigned, including tribal timber reserves, shall be managed by the 
tribal council for the benefit of the members of the entire community, 
and any cash income derived from such land shall accrue to the benefit 
of the community as a whole.

Sec. 12. Purchase of Land by the Community. Tribal funds may be used 
with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire land 
under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within the Warm Springs Reservation, or adjacent to 
the boundaries thereof, which is not now in Indian ownership, may 
be purchased by or for Che Confederated Tribes.

(b)  Restricted land which is in heirship status at the time 

of the adoption and approval of this constitution, or which may 
hereafter fall into heirship status, may be purchased by or for 
the Confederated Tribes, with the consent of all the adult heirs, 
and the legal guardians of minor heirs, or incompetent heirs, pay
ment therefor to be made as may be agreed upon.

(c)  Land owned by any member of the Confederated Tribes who 

is over the age of 60 years, or who is physically incapacitated may 
be transferred by its owner to the Confederated Tribes in exchange 
for a pension of not less than $15.00, or more than $30.00 per 
month, at the discretion of the council, for the reminder of his 
natural life, or he may, at his own option, transfer his land to the 
Confederated Tribes in exchange for a consideration to be mutually 
agreed upon between the owner and the tribal council, such con
sideration to be paid in ten equal annual installments, either to 
the transferor or in the case of his death, to his heirs. Purchases 
made under this section shall be made from available tribal funds.

(d) Land in excess of 320 acres owned by any member of the 

Confederated Tribes may be purchased with the consent of the owner, 
payments to be made under such terms as may be agreed upon.

(e) Land owned by any member of the Confederated Tribes who 

desires to leave the reservation permanently may be purchased by 
the Confederated Tribes, under such terms as may be agreed upon.

Sec. 13. Method of Making Assignments. Applications for assign
ments shall be filed with the secretary of the council and shall 
be in writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons 
applying for the land and as accurate a description of the land 
desired as the circumstances will permit. Notices of all appli
cations received by the secretary shall be posted by him in the 
agency office and in at least three conspicuous places in the 
district in which the land is located, for not less than 20 days 
before action is taken by the council.

Any member of the Confederated Tribes wishing to oppose the granting 
of an assignment shall do so in writing, setting forth his objections, 
to be filed with the secretary of the council, and may, if he so 

desires, appear before the council to present evidence. The secretary 
of the council shall furnish the Superintendent or other officer in 
charge of the agency a complete record of all action taken by the 
council on applications for assignment of land, and a complete record 
of assignments shall be kept in the agency office and shall be open 
for inspection by all members of the Confederated Tribes. 
i
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the Confederated Tribes voting at an 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in 
such election, but no amendment shall become effective until it shall 
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be 
the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any 
proposed amendment, at the request of two-thirds of the council, or 
upon presentation of a petition signed by one-third of the qualified 
voters, members of the Confederated Tribes.


BYLAWS OF THE CONFEDERATED TRIBES 
OF THE WARM SPRINGS RESERVATION OF OREGON

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 1. President. It shall be the duty of the president of 
the council to preside over all meetings of the council, perform all 
duties of chairman, and exercise any authority detailed to him, and 
shall vote only in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. Vice President. The vice president shall preside at any 
meeting of the council from which the president is absent, and, in 
the event of the death of the president or his resignation or 
removal from office, he shall serve the remainder of the term as 
president.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer. The secretary-treasurer shall conduct 
the correspondence of the tribal council, shall keep all records, 
minutes of meetings, roster of members, records as to expenditures 
and allotments of tribal, gratuitous, or other funds over which the 
council has sole charge. He shall keep an accurate record of all 
members of the Confederated Tribes, and prepare necessary resolutions 
for appropriate action by the council; he shall prepare or cause to 
be prepared by such assistants as are assigned to bin by the president, 
such reports or registers as the president or council may direct. He 
shall be required to give bond acceptable to the Confederated Tribes 
and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
 
 

ARTICLE II - QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICE

 
 No person shall represent the Confederated Tribes on the council 
unless he is a duly enrolled member of the community who has 
attained the age of 21 years, and who has never been Convicted of 
a major crime.
 
 

ARTICLE III - SALARIES

 
 The councilman shall receive as compensation for their services, 
not to exceed $12.00 per day while in session, and a mileage fee 
of seven cents per mile for travel from their home to place of 
meeting and return. Expenses shall be paid from available tribal 
funds. The tribal council may fix salaries of officers or 
committeemen. (Amendment V, approved October 23, 1953.)
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

 
 Section 1. The tribal council shall assemble on the first Monday 
of every month.

Sec. 2. A special meeting may be called upon two days' notice by 
the president or by any four members of the council.

Sec. 3. A majority of the members shall constitute a quorum to do 
business.

Sec. 4. The council may determine the rules of its proceeding and 
may punish its members for disorderly behavior.

Sec. 5. The official meeting place of the tribal council shall be 
at the agency headquarters unless otherwise agreed.

Sec. 6. No member of the council shall cast a vote on any question 
in which he may have a personal pecuniary interest.

Sec. 7. The duties of all appointed boards or officers of the 
organization shall be clearly defined by resolutions of the council 
at the time of their creation or appointment. Such boards and 
officers shall report from time to time, as required, to the coun
cil, and their activities and decisions shall be subject to review 
by the council upon petition of any persons aggrieved.

Sec. 8. Each member of the tribal council and each officer or 
subordinate officer, elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an 
oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath 
he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of 
the United States and Chis constitution and bylaws. The following

form of oath of office shall be given: "I __________ , do
solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the 
Constitution of the United States against all enemies, carry out 
faithfully and impartially the duties of my office to the best of 
my ability, and cooperate, promote, and protect the best interests 
of my tribe, in accordance with this constitution and bylaws."

Sec. 9. It shall be the duty of each member of the tribal council 
to make reports to the district from which he is elected concerning 
the proceedings of the tribal council.

Sec. 10. All final decisions of the council on matters of general 
and permanent interest to the members of the Confederated Tribes 
shall be embodied in ordinances. Such ordinances shill be published 
from time to time for the information and education of the members 
of the Confederated Tribes.

Sec. 11. All final decisions of the council on matters of temporary 
interest (such as action on the reservation budget for a single year, 
or petitions to Congress or the Secretary of the Interior) or relating 
especially to particular individuals or officials (such as adoption 
of members, instructions for tribal employees or rules of order for 
the council) shall be embodied in resolutions. Such resolutions 
shall be recorded in a special book which shall be open to inspection 
by members of the Confederated Tribes.

Sec. 12. In all ordinances, resolutions or motions the council may 
act by majority vote, but all matters of importance shall be fully 
discussed and a reasonable attempt shall be made to secure unanimous 
agreement.

Sec. 13. Every ordinance shall begin with the words: "Be it enacted 
by the Tribal Council of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs 
Reservation."

Sec. 14. Every resolution shall begin with the words: "Be it 
resolved by the Tribal Council of the Confederated Tribes of the 
Warm Springs Reservation."

Sec. 15. Every ordinance or resolution shall contain a recital of 
the provisions of this constitution under which authority for the 
said ordinance or resolution is found.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION
AND BYLAWS

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when ratified by a majority vote of 
the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation 
of Oregon, voting at a special election called by the Secretary of 
the Interior in which at least thirty percent of these entitled to 
vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior 
for his approval, and shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 15, 1937, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached constitution and bylaws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Confederated Tribes 
of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon, and was on December 18, 
1937, duly adopted by a vote of 181 for and 77 against, in an elec
tion in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their 
ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 
June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman of Tribal Council 

(sgd.) Jerry Brunoe 

(sgd.) Lewis Pitt 
Secretary-Treasurer of Tribal Council

J. W. Elliott
Superintendent, Warm Springs Agency

I, Oscar L. Chapman, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached 
constitution and bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of Oregon.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Confederated Tribes 
of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 
to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and bylaws.

Approval recommended: January 20, 1938.

(sgd.) William Zimmerman, Jr.

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs

(sgd.) Oscar L. Chapman
Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
  
 
(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.

February 14, 1938 
 

 
AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the
CONFEDERATED TRIBES of the 
 
 
WARM SPRINGS RESERVATION 
OREGON

AMENDMENT IX

 
 Section 1(c) of Article V - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be 
amended as follows:

To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets which 
may be authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, or any other qualified 
official or agency of Government; provided, that no tribal lands
shall ever be sold except any tribal lands or interests in lands 
located outside of the reservation boundaries may be sold or 
exchanged.

Section 2 of Article VIII - LAND shall be amended to read as follows:

Sec. 2. Tribal Lands. The unallotted lands of the Warm Springs 
Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by 
the Confederated Tribes of the Warm Springs Reservation, or by 
the United States in trust for the Confederated Tribes of the
Warm Springs Reservation, shall be held as tribal land, and no
part of such land shall be mortgaged or sold, except any tribal
lands or interests in lands located outside of the reservation 
boundaries may be sold or exchanged. Tribal lards shall not 
be allotted to individuals, but may be assigned to members of 
the Confederated Tribes, or leased, or otherwise used by the 
Confederated Tribes as hereinafter provided.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Assistant Secretary 

of the Interior on May 1, 1973, the attached Amendment IX

to the Constitution and bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm

Springs Reservation of Oregon, was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the tribes, and was on May 22, 1973, duly adopted by a

vote of 140 for, and 58 against, in an election in which at least

thirty percent (30%) of the 422 entitled to vote cast their ballots 

in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18,

1934 (48 Stat. 984) , as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

approval

I, William L. Rogers, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the

United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by 

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 

Amendment IX to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes 

of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon.

Approval Recommended:

Acting Director, Office of 

Indian Services

Washington, D . C.

Date: July 20, 1973

(sgd) William L. Rogers

Secretary of the Interior
 
  
 

 
AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE 
WARM SPRINGS RESERVATION 
OREGON

AMENDMENT X


Section 1 (t) of Article V - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be 
amended to read as follows:

To appropriate for tribal use of the reservation, any available 
tribal funds; provided; that any such appropriation exceeding 
$2,500 shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior; 
and provided, further, that any appropriation in excess of 
$25,000 in any one fiscal year for any purpose, other than per 
capita payments, shall be of no effect until approved in a popular 
referendum. The foregoing limitations shall not apply to 
expenditures made pursuant to tribal budget, provided, that not 
less than 90 days before the effective date of such budget it is 
posted in three public places on the reservation for not less than 
30 days and provided further, that a public hearing is held on 
such budget and thereafter the budget is approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior or his authorized representative.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Assistant Secretary

of the Interior on May 1, 1973, the attached Amendment X

to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm

Springs Reservation of Oregon, was submitted to the Qualified voters of

the tribes, and was on May 22, 1973, duly adopted by a

vote of 132 for, and 63 against, in an election in which at least

thirty percent (30%) of the 492 entitled to vote cast their ballots

in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18

1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Baord Member

Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, William L. Rogers, Deputy Assistant Secretory of the Interior of the

United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by 

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 

Amendment X to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes 

of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon.

Approval Recommended:

Acting Director, Office of 

Indian Services

Washington, D. C.

Date: July 20, 1973

(sgd) William L. Rogers

Secretary of the Interior
 
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF TIE 
WARM SPRINGS RESERVATION 
OREGON

AMENDMENT XI


Section 12, subsections (a) and (b) of Article VIII- LAND is hereby 
amended to rend as follows:

(a)  Land within the Warm Springs Reservation, or adjacent to 
the boundaries thereof, or lands which fall under the pro
visions of the Act of August 10, 1972 (86 Stat. 530), may be 
purchased by or for the Confederated Tribes.

(b)  Restricted land which is in heirship status nt the time of
the adoption of this Constitution, or which may hereafter
fall into heirship status, may be purchased by or for the 
Confederated Tribes, with the consent of the adult heirs, 
and the legal guardians of minor heirs or incompetent
heirs, payment therefor to be made as may be agreed
upon, or such lands may be purchased under the provisions 
of the Act of August 10, 1972 (8G Stat. 530), if applicable.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Assistant Secretary 

of the Interior on May 1, 1973, the attached Amendment XI

to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm 

Springs Reservation of Oregon, was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the tribes, and was on May 22, 1973, duly adopted by a

vote 158 for, and 37 against, in an election in which at least

: 

thirty percent (30%) of the 492 entitled to vote cast their ballots 

in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18,

1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, William L. Rogers, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the

United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by 

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 

Amendment XI to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes 

of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon.

Approval Recommended:

Acting Director, Office of

Indian Services

Washington, D. C.

Date: July 20, 1973

(sgd) William L Rogers

Secretary of the Interior
 
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE 
WARM SPRINGS RESERVATION 
OREGON

AMENDMENT XII


 
 Article III - SALARIES of the Bylaws shall be amended to read as follows: 
 

ARTICLE III - SALARIES


The councilmen shall receive as compensation for their services not to 
exceed $20 while in session for up to four hours per day and $5.00 per 
hour thereafter while in session, but not to exceed $40 per day total 
compensation, and fifteen cents ($.15) per mile from home to place of 
meeting and return. Expenses shall be paid from available tribal funds. 
The tribal council may fix salaries of officers or committeemen.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Assistant Secretary 

of the Interior on May 1, 1973, the attached Amendment XII

to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of the Warm

Springs Reservation of Oregon, was submitted to the qualified voters of

the tribes, and was on May 22, 1973, duly adopted by a

vote of 124 for, and 71 against, in an election in which at least

thirty percent (30%) of the 472 entitled to vote cast their ballots 

in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18,

1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, William L. Rogers, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the

United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by 

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 

Amendment XII to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes 

of the Warm Springs Reservation of Oregon.

Approval Recommended:

Acting Director, Office of 

Indian Services

Washington, D. C.

Date:

(sgd) William L Rogers

Secretary of the Interior

