 
  
  
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
 
 BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS. 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE

CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE 
  UMATILLA RESERVATION

IN OREGON


 
  
  
 APPROVED DECEMBER 7, 1949 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1957 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
OF THE
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE UMATILLA 
RESERVATION IN OREGON


We, the people of the Umatilla Indian Reservation in the State of 
Oregon, do hereby ordain and establish this Constitution and By-laws.

Article I—Name

The tribal organization shall be called the “Confederated Tribes of 
the Umatilla Indian Reservation”, and shall include Indians of the 
Cayuse, Umatilla, and Walla Walla Tribes.

Article II—Purpose

The purpose and powers of the Confederated Tribes shall be, within 
Jaw, to exercise and protect all existing and future tribal rights aris
ing from any source whether treaty, federal statute, state statute, com
mon law, or otherwise; to achieve a maximum degree of self-govern
ment in all tribal affairs; and to protect and promote the interests of 
the Indians of the Umatilla Indian Reservation.

Article III—Treaty Rights

This Constitution and By-laws is not adopted under the Indian 
Reorganization Act, also known as the “Wheeler-Howard Act.” No 
tribal right of any kind shall be weakened, impaired, or surrendered 
by the adoption of this Constitution and By-laws.

Article IV—Members

The membership of the Confederated Tribes shall consist, as follows, 

of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll of the Confederated Tribes as of July 1, 1949; provided, 
that corrections may be made in said roll by the General Council within 
five (5) years from the adoption and approval of this Constitution 
and By-laws, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior 
or his authorized representative.

(b)  All children born to enrollees of the Confederated Tribes, who 
are of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of blood of the Confederated 

Tribes. Where only one parent of such children is an enrollee of the 
Confederated Tribes, the children may become members only upon 
application accepted by the General Council.

(c)  Any other person of blood of the Confederated Tribes may, 
upon application, be admitted by a majority vote of the General 
Council to participate in tribal government and to vote and to hold 
office. It is expressly understood, however, that such persons shall 
not participate in any right or claim arising out of treaties to which 
the Confederated Tribes are a party.

Article V—General Council

Section 1. The General Council shall consist of all members of 
the Confederated Tribes of the age of eighteen (18) years or over. 
The General Council shall be the sole judge of the qualification of its 
own members.

Sec. 2. The General Council shall elect its own officers, and shall 
also elect the members of the Board of Trustees (formerly called 
the Umatilla Tribal Business Committee), as hereinafter provided; 
and the General Council shall have the power to demand reports 
from its officers and from the said Board, and to recall its officers or 
the members of the Board, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 3. The officers of the General Council shall be a Chairman, 
a Vice-Chairman, a Secretary, and Interpreter, and such other officers 
as the General Council may from time to time create and fill. Their 
duties shall be as follows:

(a)  The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the General 
Council, shall attest the minutes thereof, shall appoint temporary of
ficers in the absence of the duly elected officers, and shall perform such 
other duties as are placed upon him by this Constitution and By-laws. 
He shall vote only in case of a tie.

(b)  The Vice-Chairman shall act in place of the Chairman in the 

event of his absence or disability, or at his request.

(c)  The Secretary shall keep, prepare, and sign the official minutes 
of the meetings of the General Council and, subject to the direction of 
the Chairman, prepare an order of business in advance of each meet
ing of the General Council.

(d)  The Interpreter shall interpret what is said at meetings of the 
General Council from the English language to the commonly under
stood Indian language, and vice versa, whenever necessary to full 
understanding by all members.

Sec. 4. Meetings of the General Council may be called by the Chair
man of the General Council, by the Board of Trustees, or by petition 
signed by at least twenty (20) members of the General Council. 

Notice of each meeting, stating time, place, and purpose thereof, and 
signed by the Chairman of the General Council or the Superintendent 
of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, shall be posted in public places 
at the Umatilla Indian Agency Headquarters, and at Cayuse, Thom- 
hollow and Gibbon, Oregon, at least twenty (20) days before the 
meeting. If the Chairman of the General Council, or the Board of 
Trustees, shall certify that an emergency exists, the meeting may be 
called upon five (5) days notice.

Sec. 5. (a) Not more than thirty (30) nor less than twenty (20) 
days after this Constitution and By-laws is ratified by vote of the 
adult members of the Confederated Tribes, and approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior or his representative, as provided hereafter 
in Article VIII, the first election of officers of the General Council, and 
of members of the Board of Trustees, shall be held. Thereafter elec
tions for said positions shall be held every year in the month of No
vember, and the successful candidates shall assume office on the first 
day of December following the election. The date of said first elec
tion, and the rules for conducting it, shall be determined by the 
Umatilla Tribal Business Committee then in office.

(b)  Officers of the General Council shall hold office for a period of 
one (1) year, or until their successors are elected and take office. The 
terms of the officers elected at the first election hereunder shall expire 
on December 1, 1949.

(c)  Members of the Board of Trustees shall each hold office for a 
period of two (2) years, or until their successors are elected and take 
Office, except that in the first election of said members, the four nomi
nees receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office until De
cember 1, 1950, and the four nominees receiving the next highest num
ber of votes shall hold office until December 1, 1949.

(d)  The Chairman and the Secretary of the General Council shall 
certify as to the results of all elections of officers of the General Coun
cil, or members of the Board of Trustees, held hereunder.

Sec. 6. Any officer of the General Council, or any member of the 
Board of Trustees, may be removed from office by majority vote of the 
General Council upon the filing with the Board of Trustees of a recall 
petition signed by at least fifty (50) members of the General Council. 
Such petition shall state clearly the charges against the individual 
whose recall is sought. It shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees, 
when a recall petition is filed in proper form with sufficient signatures, 
forthwith to call an election of the General Council to vote upon the 
petition. The individual sought to be recalled shall have the right to 
see the said petition at least twenty (20) days before the said election, 
and to appear at the election and answer the charges made against him.

Sec. 7. A quorum of the General Council shall consist of thirty 
(30) members. Voting may be by show of hands, or by secret ballot, 
as the Chairman shall direct; and for members of at least one-fourth 
(14) degree of blood of the Confederated Tribes unable to attend 
meetings of the General Council, the Board of Trustees may provide 
for voting by mail and by ballot box.

Article VI—Board of Trustees

Section 1. The governing body of the Confederated Tribes shall 
be a Board of Trustees. Subject to limitations imposed by the Statutes 
or Constitution of the United States, the Board of Trustees shall have 
the following powers:

(a)  To represent the tribes and to negotiate with Federal, State 
and local governments and to advise with representatives of the In
terior Department on appropriations, projects, and legislation that 
affect the tribes.

(b)  To manage all affairs of the Confederated Tribes, including the 
administration of tribal lands, fund, timber and other resources, under 
appropriate contracts, leases, permits, and loan or sale agreements.

(c)  To appoint committees, including members of the General 
Council who are not members of the Board of Trustees, and to delegate 
authority to said committees, and to provide per diem compensation 
and reimbursement of expenses incurred by officers of the General 
Council, members of the Board of Trustees and committee members 
while acting on official tribal business.

(d)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances governing the conduct 
of members of the tribes, providing for the procedure of the Board of 
Trustees, and carrying out any powers herein conferred upon the 
Board of Trustees.

(e)  To exercise any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Con
federated Tribes, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution, or 
any powers that may in the future be delegated by an agency of local, 
state or Federal government.

Sec. 2. The members of the Board of Trustees shall consist of the 
Chairman of the General Council, as ex officio member with the right 
to vote, and eight (8) members of the General Council elected by the 
General Council. No member shall be qualified to act as a member of 
the Board of Trustees who is a non-resident of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation. The Board of Trustees shall be the sole judge of the 
qualifications of its members.

Sec. 3. The officers of the Board of Trustees shall be a Chairman, 
a Vice-Chairman, a Treasurer and a Secretary. Their duties shall be 
as follows:

(a)  The Chairman as chief executive officer of the Board of Trus
tees shall preside over all meetings of the Board of Trustees, affix his 
signature to official documents, countersign warrants duly drawn by 
the Treasurer against the tribal funds, and shall vote only in case of 
a tie.

(b)  The Vice-Chairman shall preside at meetings and otherwise act 
in full capacity of the Chairman in the absence or disability of the 
Chairman, or at his request.

(c)  The Secretary shall conduct all correspondence, issue public 
notices, take minutes, record official actions, have custody of all files 
and records, etc., of the Board of Trustees and affix his signature to 
official documents.

(d)  The Treasurer shall accept, receipt for, and safeguard all funds 
of the tribes under his custody as directed by the Board of Trustees, 
and keep a complete record of receipts and expenditures. He shall be 
a bonded officer and shall not disburse any funds of the tribes except 
as duly authorized by the Board of Trustees, and he shall report his 
accounts and all financial transactions at a meeting upon request of 
the General Council or the Board of Trustees.

The Chairman of the General Council may, but need not necessarily, 
be elected as Chairman of the Board of Trustees. The Board may re
move any of its officers at any time by a majority vote of the whole 
Board.

Sec. 4. The Board of Trustees shall hold regular monthly meetings 
at such time and place as it shall fix. Special meetings of the Board 
may be called by the Chairman of the Board, or by written request of 
any three (3) members thereof, upon at least two (2) days’ personal 
notice of each member of the time, place and purpose. At all meetings 
of the Board, whether regular or special, five (5) members shall con
stitute a quorum. All meetings shall be open to any member of the 
General Council.

Sec. 5. Whenever, in the opinion of a majority of the entire Board 
of Trustees, any member of the Board of Trustees has been guilty of 
gross neglect of duty, it shall certify its opinion, together with the 
reasons therefor, to the General Council, which shall have the power 
to remove said member from office and to elect a successor. The mem
ber who is so accused shall have the right to receive a copy of the 
charges against him at least twenty (20) days in advance of the meet
ing of the General Council at which the question of removal and of 
selection of a successor are to be voted on, and shall be entitled to 
appear at said meeting and answer said charges.

Sec. 6. Vacancies in the Board of Trustees shall be filled by the 

General Council at an election called for that purpose.

Sec. 7. The Board of Trustees shall have custody of its letters, 

documents, records, and minutes, as well as those of the General 
Council.

Article VII—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the members of the General Council at an election called for that 
purpose by resolution of the Board of Trustees or majority vote of the 
General Council, provided that such amendment receives at least fifty 
(50) affirmative votes. The notice of said election shall set forth the 
proposed amendment in full. No amendment shall become effective 
until approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

Article VIII—Ratification

This Constitution and By-laws shall become effective upon ratifica
tion by a majority vote of those adult members of the Confederated 
Tribes who shall vote as authorized by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, and subsequent approval by the Secretary of the Interior or 
his authorized representative.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION
 
 Pursuant to an order approved on May 27, 1949, by the Assistant 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the attached Constitution and By
laws was duly submitted to the adult voters of the Confederated 
Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, Oregon, for ratification, 
and was on November 4, 1949, duly ratified by a vote of 113 for, and 
104 against.

Election Committee:

Mary E. Dick
Louise M. Elk
Aaron Minthorn
Clarence Burks 
Gilbert E. Conner 
Samuel Kash Kash 
David S. Hall 
Isaac B. Patrick
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 This Constitution and By-laws, having been proposed and duly 
ratified by the adult voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla 
Indian Reservation, Oregon, on November 4, 1949, at a referendum 
called by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, is herewith approved.

Washington, D. C., December 7, 1949

William E. Warne
Assistant Secretary of the Interior

