CTUIR Constitution and By-laws

Adopted 1949
(Integrated Text — includes amendments adopted over the years)

We, the people of the Umatilla Indian Reservation in the State of Oregon, do hereby ordain and establish 
this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME 

 
 The tribal organization shall be called the "Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation", and 
shall include Indians of the Cayuse, Umatilla, and Walla Walla Tribes,
 
 

ARTICLE II - PURPOSE

 
 The purpose and powers of the Confederated Tribes shall be, within law, to exercise and protect all 
existing and future tribal rights arising from any source whether treaty, federal statute, state statute, 

 common law, or otherwise; to achieve a maximum degree of self-government in all tribal affairs; and to 

protect and promote the interests of the Indians of the Umatilla Indian Reservation.
 
 

ARTICLE III - TREATY RIGHTS

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws is not adopted under the Indian Reorganization Act, also known as the 
"Wheeler-Howard Act." No tribal right of any kind shall be weakened, impaired, or surrendered by the 
adoption of this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERS

 
 The membership of the Confederated Tribes shall consist, as follows, of:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census roll of the Confederated 
Tribes as of July 1, 1949; provided, that corrections may be made in said roll by the General Council 
within five (5) years from the adoption and approval of this Constitution and Bylaws, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(b) Membership in the Confederated Tribes shall consist of persons who:
(1) has one parent or grandparent who is an enrolled member of the Confederated Tribes;
(2) has at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of Indian blood from any federally recognized Indian tribe within 
the United States.

(c) No new applicants for membership in the Confederated Tribes under Article IV(c) shall be enrolled.
 
 

ARTICLE V - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1.

The General Council shall consist of all members of the Confederated Tribes of the age of eighteen (18) 
years or over. The General Council shall be the sole judge of the qualification of its own members.

SECTION 2.

The General Council shall elect its own officers, and shall also elect the members and officers of the 
Board of Trustees, as hereinafter provided; and the General Council shall have the power to demand 
reports from its officers and from the said Board, and to recall its officers or the members of the Board, 
as hereinafter provided.

SECTION 3.

The officers of the General Council shall be a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, a Secretary, and Interpreter, 
and such other officers as the General Council may from time to time create and fill. Their duties shall 
be as follows:

(a) The Chairman shall preside at the meetings of the General Council, shall attest the minutes thereof, 
shall appoint temporary officers in the absence of the duly elected officers, and shall perform such other 
duties as are placed upon him by this Constitution and Bylaws. He shall vote only in case of a tie.

(b) The Vice-Chairman shall act in place of the Chairman in the event of his absence or disability, or at 
his request.

(c) The Secretary shall keep, prepare, and sign the official minutes of the meetings of the General 
Council and, subject to the direction of the Chairman,.prepare an order of business in advance of each 
meeting of the General Council.

(d) The Interpreter shall interpret what is said at meetings of the General Council from the English 
language to the commonly understood Indian language, and vice versa, whenever necessary to full 
understanding by all members.

SECTION 4.

Meetings of the General Council may be called by the Chairman of the General Council, by the Board of 
Trustees, or by petition signed by at least twenty (20) members of the General Council. Notice of each 
meeting, stating time, place, and purpose thereof, and signed by the Chairman of the General Council or 
the Superintendent of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, shall be posted in public places at the Umatilla 
Indian Agency Headquarters, and at Cayuse, Thornhollow and Gibbon, Oregon, at least twenty (20) days 
before the meeting. If the Chairman of the General Council, or the Board of Trustees, shall certify that an 
emergency exists, the meeting may be called upon five (5) days notice.

SECTION 5.

(a) All tribal elections occurring for Board of Trustees and General Council officials be held in 
November in odd numbered years.
(b) Officers of the General Council shall hold office for a period of two (2) years, or until their

successors are elected and take office.

(c) Members of the Board of Trustees shall each hold office for a period of two (2) years, or until their 
successors are elected and take office, except that in the first election of said members, the four 
nominations receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office until December 1, 1950, and the four 
nominees receiving the next highest number of votes shall hold office until December 1, 1949.

(d) The Chairman and the Secretary of the General Council shall certify as to the results of all elections 
of officers of the General Council, or members of the Board of Trustees, held thereafter,

SECTION 6.

Any officer of the General Council, or any member of the Board of Trustees, may be removed from 
office by majority vote of the General Council upon the filing with the Board of Trustees of a recall 
petition signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the members of the General Council. Such petition shall 
state clearly the charges against the individual whose recall is sought. It shall be the duty of the Board of 
Trustees, when a recall petition is filed in proper form with sufficient signatures, forthwith to call an 
election of the General Council to vote upon the petition. The individual sought to be recalled shall have 
the right to see the said petition at least twenty (20) days before the said election, and to appear at the 
election and answer the charges made against him.

SECTION 7.

A quorum of the General Council shall consist of thirty (30) members. Voting may be by show of hands, 
or by secret ballot, as the Chairman shall direct; and for members of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of 
blood of the Confederated Tribes unable to attend meetings of the General Council, the Board of 
Trustees may provide for voting by mail and by ballot box.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - BOARD OF TRUSTEES

 
 SECTION 1.

The governing body of the Confederated Tribes shall be a Board of Trustees. Subject to limitations 
imposed by the Statutes or Constitution of the United States, the Board of Trustees shall have the 
following powers:

(a) To represent the Tribes and to negotiate with Federal, State and local governments and to advise with 
representatives of the Interior Department on appropriations, projects, and legislation that affect the 
Tribes.

(b) To manage all affairs of the Confederated Tribes, including the administration of tribal lands, fund, 
timber and other resources, under appropriate contracts, leases, permits, and loan or sale agreements.

(c) To appoint committees, including members of the General Council who are not members of the 
Board of Trustees, and to delegate authority to said committees, and to provide per diem compensation 
and reimbursement of expenses incurred by officers of the General Council, members of the Board of 
Trustees and committee members while acting on official tribal business.

(d) To promulgate and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of all persons and activities within the 
boundaries of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, providing for the procedure of the Board of Trustees, and 
carrying out any powers herein conferred upon the Board of Trustees.

(e) To exercise any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Confederated Tribes, but not expressly 
referred to in this Constitution, or any powers that may in the future be delegated by an agency of local, 
state or Federal government.

SECTION 2.

The members of the Board of Trustees shall consist of the Chairman of the General Council as ex officio 
member with the right to vote, and eight (8) members of the General Council elected by the General 
Council. No member shall be qualified to act as a member of the Board of Trustees who is a 
non-resident of the Umatilla Indian Reservation. The Board of Trustees shall be the sole judge of the 
qualifications of its members.

SECTION 3.

The officers of the Board of Trustees shall be a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, a Treasurer and a Secretary. 
Their duties shall be as follows;

(a) The Chairman as chief executive officer of the Board of Trustees shall preside over all meetings of 
the Board of Trustees, affix his signature to official documents, countersign warrants duly drawn by the 
Treasurer against the tribal funds, and shall vote only in case of a tie.

(b) The Vice-Chairman shall preside at meetings and otherwise act in full capacity of the Chairman in 
the absence or disability of the Chairman, or at his request.

(c) The Secretary shall conduct all correspondence, issue public notices, take minutes, record official 
actions, have custody of all files and records, etc., of the Board of Trustees and affix his signature to 
official documents.

(d) The Treasurer shall accept, receipt for, and safeguard all funds of the Tribes under his custody as 
directed by the Board of Trustees, and keep a complete record of receipts and expenditures. He shall be a 
bonded officer and shall not disburse any funds of the Tribes except as duly authorized by the Board of 
Trustees, and he shall report his accounts and all financial transactions at a meeting upon request of the 
General Council or the Board of Trustees.

The Chairman of the General Council may, but need not necessarily, be elected as Chairman of the 
Board of Trustees. The Board may remove any of its officers at any time by a majority vote of the whole 
Board.

SECTION 4.

The Board of Trustees shall hold regular monthly meetings at such time and place as it shall fix. Special 
meetings of the Board may be called by the Chairman of the Board, or by written request of any three (3) 
members thereof, upon at least two (2) days' personal notice of each member of the time, place and
purpose. At all meetings of the Board, whether regular or special, five (5) members shall constitute a 
quorum. All meetings shall be open to any member of the General Council.

SECTION 5.

Whenever, in the opinion of a majority of the entire Board of Trustees, any member of the Board of 
Trustees has been guilty of gross neglect of duty, it shall certify its opinion, together with the reasons 
therefore, to the General Council, which shall have the power to remove said member from office and to

.

This Constitution and Bylaws, having been proposed and duly ratified by the adult voters of the 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, Oregon, on November 4, 1949, at a referendum 
called by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, is herewith approved.

WILLIAM E. WARNE
Assistant Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D.C., December 7, 1949
 
 

AMENDMENTS

 
 I.  Amended Article VI, Section 1(d) in its entirety as follows:

To promulgate and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of all persons and activities within the 
boundaries of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, providing for the procedures of the Board of Trustees, 
and carrying out any powers herein conferred upon the Board of Trustees.

[At an election held on November 26, 1976, the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. I by a vote of 116 for and 40 against. Amendment No. I was 
approved by the BIA and took effect on January 17, 1977.]

II. Amended Article IV(b) in its entirety as follows:

Membership in the Confederated Tribes shall consist of persons who:

(1) has one parent who is an enrolled member of the Confederated Tribes; and

(2) has at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of Indian blood from any federally recognized Indian tribe within 
the United States.

[At an election held on November 27, 1990, the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. II by a vote of 210 for and 165 against. Amendment No. II was 
approved by the BIA and took effect on December 21, 1990.]

III.  Amended Article IV(c) in its entirety as follows:

No new applicants for membership in the Confederated Tribes under Article IV(c) shall be enrolled.

[At an election held on November 27, 1990, the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. III by a vote of 179 for and 163 against. Amendment No. III was 
approved by the BIA and took effect on December 21, 1990.]

IV. Amended Article V, Section 2 in its entirety as follows: 

elect a successor. The member who is so accused shall have the right to receive a copy of the charges 
against him at least twenty (20) days in advance of the meeting of the General Council at which the 
question of removal and of selection of a successor are to be voted on, and shall be entitled to appear at 
said meeting and answer said charges.
SECTION 6.

Vacancies in the Board of Trustees shall be filled by the General Council at an election called for that 
purpose.

SECTION 7.

The Board of Trustees shall have custody of its letters, documents, records, and minutes, as well as those 
of the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the members of the General 
Council at an election called for that purpose by resolution of the Board of Trustees or majority vote of 
the General Council, provided that such amendment receives at least fifty (50) affirmative votes. The 
notice of said election shall set forth the proposed amendment in full. No amendment shall become 
effective until approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - RATIFICATION

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws shall become effective upon ratification by a majority vote of those adult 
voters of the Confederated Tribes who shall vote as authorized by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
and subsequent approval by the Secretary of Interior or his authorized representative.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved on May 27, 1949, by the Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the 
attached Constitution and Bylaws was duly submitted to the adult voters of the Confederated Tribes of 
the Umatilla Indian Reservation, Oregon, for ratification, and was on November 4, 1949, duly ratified by 
a vote of 113 for, and 104 against.

Election Committee:

MARY E. DICK
LOUISE M. ELK
 
  
  
 
AARON MINTHORN
CLARENCE BURKE
 
 GILBERT E. CONNER 
 
SAMUEL KASH KASH
 
 DAVID S. HALL
ISAAC B. PATRICK
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 The General Council shall elect its own officers, and shall also elect the members and officers of the 
Board of Trustees, as hereinafter provided.

[At an election held on November 27, 1990, the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. IV by a vote of 197 for and 172 against. Amendment No. IV was 
approved by the BIA and took effect on December 21, 1990.]

V. Amended Article V, Section 5(b) in its entirety as follows:

Officers of the General Council shall hold office for a period of two (2) years, or until their successors 
are elected and take office.

[At an election held on November 27, 1990, the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. V by a vote of 267 for and 104 against. Amendment No. V was 
approved by the BIA and took effect on December 21, 1990.]

VI. Amended Article V, Section 5(a) in its entirety as follows:

All tribal elections occurring for Board of Trustees and General Council officials shall be held in 
November in odd numbered years.

 [At an election held on June 18, 1992 the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. VI by a vote of 50 for and 18 against. Amendment No. VI was 
approved by the BIA and took effect on October 9, 1992.]

VII. Amended Article IV, Section (b)(1) in its entirety as follows:

Has one parent or grandparent who is an enrolled member of the Confederated Tribes;

[At an election held on November 23, 1993 the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. VII by a vote of 238 for and 126 against. Amendment No. VII was 
approved by the BIA and took effect June 8, 1995.]

VIII. Amended Article V, Section 2 in its entirety as follows:

The General Council shall elect its own officers, and shall also elect the members and officers of the 
Board of Trustees, as hereinafter provided; and the General Council shall have the power to demand 
reports from its officers and from the said Board, and to recall its officers or the members of the Board, 
as hereinafter provided.

[At an election held on November 20, 2001, the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. VIII by a vote of 318 for and 169 against. Amendment No. VIII was

approved by the BIA and took effect on April 30, 2002.]

IX. Amended Article V, Section 6 in its entirety as follows:

Any officer of the General Council, or any member of the Board of Trustees, may be removed from 
office by majority vote of the General Council upon the filing with the Board of Trustees of a recall 
petition signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the members of the General Council. Such petition shall 
state clearly the charges against the individual whose recall is sought. It shall be the duty of the Board of 
Trustees, when a recall petition is filed in proper form with sufficient signatures, forthwith to call an 
election of the General Council to vote upon the petition. The individual sought to be recalled shall have 
the right to see the said petition at least twenty (20) days before the said election, and to appear at the 
election and answer the charges made against him.

[At an election held on December 17, 2002, the voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation ratified Amendment No. IX by a vote of 208 for and 174 against. Amendment No. IX was 
approved by the BIA and took effect on December 31, 2002.]

OCT - 9 1992
 
  
  
 

REPLY TO

 
 ATTN of: Portland Area Director 
 

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

 
 memorandum

subject: UmatiIIa Tribe's Approval of Amendment to Constitution and Bylaws

TO: Superintendent, Umatilla Agency

On June 18, 1992, the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian
Reservation voted on three (3) proposed amendments to their constitution
and bylaws. However, only one (1) proposed amendment out of three (3)
received fifty affirmative votes. Our records indicate there are five
(5) previous amendments to the tribe's constitution, therefore, the one
(1) amendment which was approved by the voters is numbered Amendment VI.

As noted in the Superintendent, Umatilla Agency, transmittal of October 
5, 1992, and the information concerning the election, the notice of the 
constitutional amendments and election were sent to all voting age 
members and the election results was certified by the Election Committee 
Members. Amendment No. I is hereby approved and renumbered Amendment VI 
and worded as follows:
 
 

AMENDMENT VI

 
 ARTICLE V, Section 5

(a) All Tribal elections occurring for Board of Trustees and General 
Council officials shall be held every November in odd numbered years.

The Confederated Tribes are to be commended for the work in updating 
their governing document.

We would like to have a current up-to-date copy of the tribes' 
constitution which incorporates the attached new approved amendments.

If you have any questions, please contact Jim Rogers at (503) 231-6723.
 
  
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE UMATILLA INDIAN 
RESERVATION IN OREGON

AMENDMENT VI


ARTICLE V, Section 5 (a) is hereby amended and to read as follows:

All Tribal elections occurring for Board of Trustees and General

Council officials shall be held every November in odd numbered years.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, as Portland Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Portland, Oregon, 
by virtue of the authority redelegated to the Portland Area Director by 
10 BIAM, Section 2, Release 44, February 18, 1989, incorporating 230 DM 
Release No. 2784 dated March 16, 1988, do hereby approve the foregoing 
Amendment VI to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Confederated Tribes of 
the Umatilla Indian Reservation in Oregon. This amendment was adopted by 
a majority of the qualified voters of the said Confederated Tribes of the 
Umatilla Reservation in Oregon, on June 18, 1992, by a vote of 50 for and 
18 against.

Portland Area Director 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Portland, Oregon

Dated: OCT 9 1992
 
  
  
 

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT
MEMORANDUM

 
 date: 

October 5, 1992 
 

REPLY TO

 
 attn OF: 

Superintendent, Umatilla Agency

subject: 

Constitutional Amendments - Umatilla Tribe

TO: 

Area Director, Portland Area
Attention: Branch of Tribal Operations

The attached memorandum from the Umatilla Tribe certifies the number of ballots cast and

corrects the language in Amendment No. 1. The original documentation was sent directly to the

Secretary of the Interior. We received the documentation from your office for corrections.

We recommend approval of the Amendment change. If further documentation is required,

please advise.

GjENERAL COUNCIL 
and 
BOARD of TRUSTEES
 
 

CONFEDERATED TRIBES

 
 Umatilla Indian Reservation

of the

P.O. Box 638

PENDLETON, OREGON 97801

Area Code (503) Phone 276-3165

TO: ELWOOD PATAWA, CHAIRMAN; BOARD OF TRUSTEES

FR: ELIZABETH SHOWAWAY, OFFICE SECRETARY; GENERAL COUNCIL

DA: OCTOBER 2, 1992

RE: CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION, JUNE 18, 1992
 
 

PER REQUEST OF ANTONE MINTHORN, CHAIRMAN OF GENERAL COUNCIL, I 
 
 OPENED THE GENERAL COUNCIL BALLOT BOX AT 12:46 P.M. IN THE PRESENCE 
OF MARIAN CRAWFORD, ELECTION COMMITTEE MEMBER.

WE FOUND:
 
 

VICE CHAIRMAN GENERAL COUNCIL 

 
 WRITE IN: 19 VOTES

ANTHONY VAN PELT: 46 VOTES 

ABSTAIN: 4 VOTES

TOTAL BALLOTS CAST: 69

AMENDMENT #1: ARTICLE V, SECTION 5(A) SHALL BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS: 
 
 
ALL TRIBAL ELECTIONS OCCURRING FOR BOARD OF TRUSTEES AND GENERAL 
 
 COUNCIL OFFICIALS SHALL BE HELD EVERY NOVEMBER IN ODD NUMBER YEARS.

YES: 50 VOTES; NO: 18 VOTES; ABSTENTIONS: 1

TOTAL BALLOTS CAST: 

69

AMENDMENT #2: ARTICLE V, SECTION 5 (C) SHALL BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS: 
THE FOUR ^9} MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF TRUSTEES WHOSE TERMS ARE TOi 
EXPIRE IN NOVEMBER 1992 SHALL SERVE UNTIL NOVEMBER 1993.

YES: 40 VOTES; NO: 27 VOTES; ABSTENTIONS; 2

TOTAL BALLOTS CAST: 69

AMENDMENT #3: ARTICLE VI, SECTION 3 AMENDED TO ADD THE FOLLOWING: 
BOARD OF TRUSTEE OFFICER TERMS SHALL BE FOR PERIOD OF TWO (2) YEARS.

YES: 47 VOTES: NO: 20 VOTES; ABSTENTIONS: 2

TOTAL BALLOTS CAST: 69

WE FOUND THAT THERE WERE 65 BALLOTS CAST AT THE POLLS, AND;
FOUR (4) ABSENTEE BALLOTS CAST FOR A TOTAL OF SIXTY NINE (69) VOTERS
ON JUNE 18, 1992.
 
  
 

MEMORANDUM
 
 OCTOBER 2, 1992
ELWOOD PATAWA, CHAIRMAN; 
 
BOARD OF TRUSTEES

THIS IS A SWORN STATEMENT THAT WE FIND TO BE TRUE AND CORRECT, 


AND; WE WERE DOUBLY SURE OF THIS ACCOUNT.

PLEASE NOTE;

THE ASTERISK PROVIDED IN AMENDMENT #1 WHERE IT STATED ON THE ORIGINAL 
CERTIFICATION, THE WORD "SECOND” HAD BEEN DELETED."
 
  
  
 

ERS
CC ANTONE
MARIAN
 
 MARGE ALLMAN, CHAIRMAN; ELECTION COMMITTEE 
 

DOCUMENTATION

 
 (Telephone Call or Personal Visit)

Person(s) called or visited and station;

Person(s) calling or visiting and station;

Date and Time:

Purpose of Call or Visit:

Comment a or follow-up action:

CONFEDERATED TRIBES of the Umatilla Indian 

Reservation
 
 

GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 BOARD of TRUSTEES

SUBJECT: BOARD OF TRUSTEES APPROVAL OF "CERTIFICATION OF ELECTION” OF JUNE 18, 1992 SPECIAL

ELECTION. 8OT/ELECTION COMMITTEE WORK SESSIONS HAVE SEEN HELD TO APPROVE THE CONSTITUTIONAL

& BYLAW REFORMS NEEDED BEFORE ELECTION. ALSO APPROVED THE ELECTION OF G.C. VICE CHAIRMAN.

ELWOOD H. PATAWA, CHAIRMAN 
 
 

ALPHONSE HALFMOON, VICE-CHAIRMAN 

 
 ROSE MARY NARCISSE. SECRETARY 

WILLIAM H. BURKE, TREASURER 

LOUIE H. DICK, JR., MEMBER 

CARL D. SAMPSON, MEMBER 
 
 

JOHN BEVIS, MEMBER 

JAY MINTHORN, MEMBER 

ANTONE MINTHORN, EX-OFFICIO

 
 Results: YES  6  NO  0 

ABSTAIN  0 

TOTAL CONTACTED  6 

Confederated Tribes Of The Umatilla Indian Reservation 
Mission, Oregon
June 18, 1992
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION

 
 We, the undersigned, ELECTION COMMITTEE MEMBERS, hereby certify 
that on Thursday, June 10, 1992, after the close of the General 
Election Polls, which were open June IS, 1992 from 8:00 A.M. to 
8:00 P.M. and held at the Cay-Una-Wa Education Center, Umatilla 
Indian Reservation, Mission, Oregon for the purpose of electing a 
Vice Chairman of the General Council and to vote on three 
Constitutional Amendments.

Vice Chairman General Council

Anthony VanPelt-------46
 
 

CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendent No. 1 Article V, Section 5 (a) shall be amended as 
follows: All Tribal elections occurring for Board of Trustees and 
General Council officials shall be held every November in 
odd numbered years.

Yes----50 

No---18

Amendment No. 2 Article V, Section 5 (c) shall be amended as 
The four (4) members of the Board of Trustees whose
follows: 
terms are to expire in November 1992 shall serve until November 
1993.

Yes------ 40 No------ 27

Amendment No. 3 Article VI, Section 3 amended to add the 
following: Board of Trustee officer terms shall be for period of 
two (2) years.

Yes-------47 No------- 20

Regular Ballots----69
Absentee------ 4
 
 

WE THE ELECTION COMMITTEE MEMBERS HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE ABOVE 
 
 RESULTS ARE ACCURATE ARD. FINAL. June 18, 1592
 
 

WE THE ELECTION COMMITTEE MEMBERS HEREBY CERTIFY THAT THE ABOVE 
 
 RESULTS ARE ACCURATE AND FINAL.

Resolution No. 92-34
 
 

CERTIFICATE

 
 The undersigned, Elwood H. Patawa and Rose Mary Narcisse, hereby certify that they 
are the Chairman and Secretary, respectively, of the Board of Trustees, of the 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, that at a duly called and held 
meeting of said Board at the Board Room of the Nicht-Yow-Way community Center, 
Pendleton, Oregon, on June 3, 1992, a quorum of said Board present and the 
following Resolution was regularly moved, seconded, and adopted by a vote of
7 FOR, 1 AGAINST. 0 ABSTAINING.

Resolution

WHEREAS, the Constitution and By-Laws of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla 
Indian Reservation (CTUIR) was approved on November 4, 1949, which 
Constitution and By-Laws contain the procedures for the election of tribal 
officials; AND

WHEREAS, the General Council approved amendments to the CTUIR Constitution 
and By-Laws calling for the direct election of Board of Trustees officers 
and the extension of General Council officer terms to two years in 
November of 1990; AND

WHEREAS, following the approval of these constitutional amendments In 1990, the 
Tribal Election Committee and Board of Trustees proposed changes to 
the Election Ordinance, which changes were adopted by the Board of 
Trustees by Resolution No. 91-33 ; AND

WHEREAS, the tribal election in November of 1991, which was Conducted under the 

revised Election Ordinance, indicated that further changes in the tribal 
election procedures were necessary to insure consistency with the 
CTUIR Constitution and By-Laws and to provide for a fair and efficient 
tribal process; AND

WHEREAS, the Board of Trustees and Tribal Election Committee have met in several 

worksesslons to develop proposed election reforms, which reforms will 
require further amendments to the CTUIR Constitution and By-Laws; 
 
 
AND

 
 WHEREAS, a Special General Council meeting on election reforms was held on April 

16, 1992 in which four proposed constitutional amendments were 
presented to the General Council for their review and comment; AND

Page Two 
Resolution No. 92-34 
June 3, 1992

WHEREAS, oral comments from General Council members were recorded at that 

Special General Council meeting and written comments on the proposed 
constitutional amendments were accepted until May 8, 1992; AND

WHEREAS, the oral and written comments received have strongly favored putting 

constitutional amendments on the ballot that would provide for tribal 
elections to be held every second year in odd numbered years, to have 
those Board members whose terms expire November 1992 to serve 
until November 1993 and to have Board members elected as Board 
officers to serve in said office for a two year term; AND

WHEREAS, the oral and written comments received opposed including a proposed 

amendment on the ballot that would extend Board member terms to four 
years; NOW THEREFORE BE IT

RESOLVED, that the Board of Trustees, pursuant to Article VII of the CTUIR 

Constitution and By-laws, does hereby approve this resolution calling for 
a special election of the General Council on the following proposed 
constitutional amendments:

Amendment No. 1. Article V, Section 5(a) shall be amended as follows: 
All tribal elections occurring for Board of Trustees and General Council 
officials shall be held every second November in odd numbered years.

Amendment No.2. Article V, Section 5(c) shall be amended as follows; 
The four (4) members of the Board of Trustees whose terms are to 
expire in November 1992 shall serve until November 1993.

Amendment No. 3. Article VI, Section 3 amended to add the following: 
Board of Trustees officer terms shall be for a period of two (2) years; 
 
 
AND BE IT FURTHER

 
 RESOLVED, that the special election of the General Council shall be held in 

conjunction with the election to fill the General Council Vice- 
Chairmanship, which election shall be held on June 18, 1992; AND BE 
 
 
IT FINALLY

 
 Page Three
Resolution 92*34
June 3, 1992

RESOLVED, that in accordance with Article VII of the CTUIR Constitution and By- 
Laws, the General Council Chairman shall Insure that notice is sent to 
each member of the General Council regarding the date set for the 
special election as well as the actual language of the, proposed 
constitutional amendments that will be submitted to the General Council 
for a vote.

AND that said Resolution has not been modified, amended or repealed and Is still 
full force and effect.

Dated this 3rd day of June, 1992.

ATTEST:
 
  
  
 

GENERAL COUNCIL
 
 and 
 

BOARD OF TRUSTEES

CONFEDERATED TRIBES

 
 of the

Umatilla 
Indian 

Reservation

The Honorable Manuel Lujan, Jr.
Secretary, Department of the Interior
18849 C Street, N.W., Room 6151
Washington, D.C. 20240

Re: Approval of Amendment to Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation

Dear Secretary Lujan:

Pursuant to Article VII of the Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation (CTUIR), 
amendments to our Constitution require approval by the Secretary of 
the Interior or his authorized representative. Enclosed please 
find a Resolution needing said approval.

To assist in your review and approval of the enclosed 
amendment, I submit the fallowing. Amendments to the CTUIR 
Constitution and Bylaws are governed by Article VII. That Article 
states:

ARTICLE VII — AMENDMENTS

This constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the members of the General Council at an election called 
for that purpose by resolution of the Board of Trustees or majority 
vote of the General Council, provided that such amendment receives 
at least fifty (50) affirmative votes. The notice of said election 
shall set forth the proposed amendment in full. No amendment shall 
become effective until approved by the Secretary of the Interior or 
his authorized representative.

The enclosed Resolution fully satisfies each of the requirements of 
Article VII.

The constitutional amendment was submitted to a vote of the 
CTUIR General Council at a special election held on June 18, 1992. 
Prior to the special election, the office of the Chairman of the 
General Council sent out a notice to each member of the General 
 
 

 
 
 Council providing notice of the special election and the notice set 
forth the proposed amendment in full. The results of the balloting 
on June 18, 1992 on the enclosed amendment were 50 votes in favor 
of the amendment and 18 opposed. The election results on this 
amendment ware certified by the Umatilla Tribal Election Committee 
on July 2, 1992 and approved by the Board of Trustees on July 7, 
1992.

If you have any questions regarding this matter, do not 
hesitate to contact me at (503) 276-3165 or Antone Minthorn, 
Chairman of the General Council at (503) 276-3570. Thank you for 
your attention to this Important issue.

Sincerely,

Elwood H. Patawa, Chairman 
Board of Trustees

EHP:lc
Enclosure

DEC 21 1990

Portland Area Director

Approval of Amendments - Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation

Superintendent, Umatilla Agency

On November 27, 1990, the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation voted on five (5) proposed amendments to their constitution 
and bylaws. Our records indicate there was one previous amendment to the 
tribe's constitution, therefore, the four (4) amendments which were 
approved by the voters are numbered II through V.

The proposed amendment to change the term of the Board of Trustees, from 
two (2) years to four (4) years was disapproved by the voters by a vote 

of 156 for and 206 against.

Therefore, as noted by the Acting Superintendent, Umatilla Agency, 
transmittal of December 6, 1990, of the information surrounding the 

election, that notice of the constitutional amendments and election were 
sent to all voting age members and the election results was certified by 
the Board of Trustees by approval of Resolution No. 90-79, Amendment II, 
III, IV, and V are hereby approved and worded as follows:
 
 

AMENDMENT II

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERS

 
 (b)  Membership in the Confederated Tribes shall consist of persons 

who:

1.  has one parent who is an enrolled member of the Confederated 
Tribes; and
2.  has at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of Indian blood from any 
federally recognized Indian Tribe within the United States.
 
 

AMENDMENT III

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERS

 
 No new applicants for membership in the Confederated Tribes 

(c) 
under Article IV (c) shall be enrolled.
 
  
 

AMENDMENT IV

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE UMATILLA INDIAN 
RESERVATION IN OREGON

AMENDMENT III


 
  
 ARTICLE IV(c) is hereby amended to read as follows: 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERS

 
 (c)  No new applicants for membership in the Confederated Tribes under 
Article IV (c) shall be enrolled.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, as Acting Portland Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Portland, 
Oregon, by virtue of the authority redelegated to the Portland Area 
Director by 10 BIAM, Section 2, Release 44, February 18, 1989, 
incorporating 230 DM Release No. 2784 dated March 16, 1988, do hereby 
approve the foregoing Amendment III to the Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation f.n Oregon. This 
amendment was adopted by a majority of the qualified voters of the said 
Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian Reservation in Oregon, on 
November 27, 1990, by a vote of 179 for and 163 against.

Portland Area Director
Bureau of 
Portland,

Indian Affairs
Oregon

Dated:

DEC 21 1990
 
 

AMENDMENT I

 
 Constitution and By-Laws of the

Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Reservation 
in Oregon

Amendment I

Section 1 (d) of Article VI, BOARD OF TRUSTEES, shall be 

amended to read as follows:

(d)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances governing 

the conduct of all persons and activities within 

the boundaries of the Umatilla Indian Reservation, 

providing for the procedures of the Board of Trustees, 

and carrying out any powers herein conferred upon the 

Board of Trustees.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Doyce L. Waldrip, Acting Area Director, Bureau of Indian 

Affairs, Portland, Oregon, by virtue of the authority granted to 

the Secretary of the Interior of the United States, by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to the 

Commssioner of Indian Affairs by 230 DM 1.1 and redelegated to

me by 10 BIAM, do hereby approve the foregoing Amendment I to the

Constitution and By-Laws of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla 

Reservation, in Oregon, regarding powers of the Board of Trustees. 

This Amendment was adopted by a majority of the qualified voters 

of the said Confederated Tribes voting on November 26, 1976, at

an election called by the Board of Trustees.

Date JAN 17 1977
 
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
 
 of the 
 
CONFEDERATED TRIBES OF THE UMATILLA RESERVATION 

 
 in Oregon

We, the people of the Umatilla Indian Reservation in the State of 

Oregon, do hereby ordain and establish this Constitution and By-laws.

Article I  - Name

The tribal organization shall be called the "Confederated Tribes of 

the Umatilla Indian Reservation", and shall include Indians of the Cayuse, 
Umatilla, and Walla Walla Tribes.

Article II  - Purpose

The purpose and powers of the Confederated Tribes shall be, within law, 

to exercise and protect all existing and future tribal rights arising from 
any source whether treaty, federal statute, state statute, common law, or 
otherwise; to achieve a maximum degree of self-government in all tribal af
fairs; and to protect and promote the interests of the Indians of the 
Umatilla Indian Reservation.

Article III  - Treaty Rights

This Constitution and By-laws is not adopted under the Indian Reor
ganization Act, also known as the "Wheeler-Howard Act." No tribal right of 
any kind shall be weakened, impaired, or surrendered by the adoption of 
this Constitution and By-laws.

Article IV - Members

The membership of the Confederated Tribes shall consist, as follows, of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll of the Confederated Tribes as of July 1, 1949 provided, that 
corrections may be made in said roll by the General Council within five (5) 
years from the adoption and approval of this Constitution and By-laws, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(b)  All children born to enrollees of the Confederated Tribes, who 
are of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of blood of the Confederated Tribes. 
Where only one parent of such children is an enrollee of the Confederates. 
Tribes, the children may become members only upon application accepted 
by the General Council.

(c)  Any other person of blood of the Confederated Tribes may, upon

applications be admitted by a majority vote of the General Council to 
participate in tribal government and to vote and to hold office. It! is 
expressly understood, however, that such persons shall not participate in 
any right or claim arising out of treaties to which the Confederated Tribes 
are a party.

Article V  - General Council

Section 1. The General Council shall consist of all members of the 

Confederated Tribes of the age of eighteen (18) years or over. The 
General Council shall be the sole judge of the qualification of its own 
members.

Section 2. The General Council shall elect its own officers, and 
shall also elect the members of the Board of Trustees (formerly called the 
Umatilla Tribal Business Committee), as hereinafter provided; and the 
General Council shall have the power to demand reports from its officers land 
from the said Board, and to recall its officers or the members of the Board, 
as hereinafter provided.

Section 3. The officers of the General Council shall be a Chairman, a 
Vice-Chairman, a Secretary, and Interpreter, and such other officers as the 
General Council may from time to time create and fill. Their duties shall 
be as follows:

(a)  The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the General Council, 

shall attest the minutes thereof, shall appoint temporary officers in the 
absence of the duly elected officers, and shall perform such other duties as 
are placed upon him by this Constitution and By-laws, He shall vote only in 
case of a tie.

(b)  The Vice-Chairman shall act in place of the Chairman in the event 

of his absence or disability, or at his request.

(c)  The Secretary shall keep, prepare, and sign the official minutes 

of the meetings of the General Council and, subject to the direction of the 
Chairman, prepare an order of business in advance of each meeting of the 
General Council.

(d)  The Interpreter shall interpret what is said at meetings of the 

General Council from the English language to the commonly understood Indian 
language, and vice versa, whenever necessary to full understanding by all 
members.

Section 4. Meetings of the General Council may be called by the Chair
man of the General Council, by the Board of Trustees, or by petition signed

by at least twenty (20) members of the General Council. Notice of each 
meeting, stating time, place, and purpose thereof, and signed by the Chair
man of the General Council or the Superintendent of the Umatilla Indian 
Reservation, shall be posted in public places at the Umatilla Indian Agency 
Headquarters, and at Cayuse, Thornhollow and Gibbon, Oregon, at leapt 
twenty (20) days before the meeting. If the Chairman of the General Council, 
of the Board of Trustees, shall certify that an emergency exists, the meet
ing may be called upon five (5) days notice.

Section 5. (a) Not more than thirty (30) nor less than twenty (20) 
days after this Constitution and By-laws is ratified by vote of the adult 
members of the Confederated Tribes, and approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior or his representative, as provided hereafter in Article VIII, the 
first election of officers of the General Council, and of members of the 
Board of Trustees, shall be held. Thereafter elections for said positions 
shall be held every year in the month of November, and the successful candi
dates shall assume office on the first day of December following the 
election. The date of said first election, and the rules for conducting it, 
shall be determined by the Umatilla Tribal Business Committee then in 
office.

(b)  Officers of the General Council shall hold office for a period of 

one (1) year, or until their successors are elected and take office. The 
terms of the officers elected at the first election hereunder shall expire 
on December 1, 1949.

(c)  Members of the Board of Trustees shall each hold office for a 
period of two (2) years, or until their successors are elected and take 
office, except that in the first election of said members, the four nomi
nees receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office until De
cember 1, 1950, and the four nominees receiving the next highest number of 
votes shall hold office until December 1, 1949.

(d)  The Chairman and the Secretary of the General Council shall certi

fy as to the results of all elections of officers of the General Council, 
or members of the Board of Trustees, held hereunder.

Section 6. Any officer of the General Council, or ary member of the 

Board of Trustees, may be removed from office by majority |vote of the 
General Council upon the filing with the Board of Trustees of a recall 
petition signed by at least fifty (50) members of the General Council. 
Such petition shall state clearly the charges against the Individual whose 
recall is sought. It shall be the duty of the Board of Trustees, when a 
recall petition is filed in proper form with sufficient signatures, forth
with to call an election of the General Council to vote upon the petition. 

 The individual sought to be recalled shall have the right to see the said 

petition at least twenty (20) days before the said electipn, and to appear 
at the election and answer the charges made against him.

Section 7. A quorum of the General Council shall consist of thirty 

(30) members. Voting may be by show of hands, or by secret ballot, as the 
Chairman shall direct; and for members of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree 
of blood of the Confederated Tribes unable to attend meetings of the 
General Council, the Board of Trustees may provide for voting by mail and 
by ballot box.

Article VI  - Board of Trustees

Section 1. The governing body of the Confederated Tribes shall be a 

Board of Trustees. Subject to limitations imposed by the Statutes or 
Constitution of the United States, the Board of Trustees shall have the 
following powers;

(a)  To represent the tribes and to negotiate with Federal, State and 

local governments and to advise with representatives of the Interior 
Department on appropriations, projects, and legislation that affect the 
tribes.

(b)  To manage all affairs of the Confederated Tribes, including the 

administration of tribal lands, fund, timber and other resources, under 
appropriate contracts, leases, permits, and loan or sale agreements.

(c)  To appoint committees, including members of the General Council 

who are not members of the Board of Trustees, and to delegate authority to 
said committees, and to provide per diem compensation and reimbursement of 
expenses incurred by officers of the General Council, members of the Board 
of Trustees and committee members while acting on official tribal business.

(d)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of 
members of the tribes, providing for the procedure of the Board of Trustees, 
and carrying out any powers herein conferred upon the Board of Trustees.

(e)  To exercise any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Con
federated Tribes, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution, or 
any powers that may in the future be delegated by an agency of local, state
or Federal government.

Section 2. The members of the Board of Trustees shall consist of ths 

Chairman of the General Council, as ex officio member with the right to 
vote, and eight (8) members of the General Council elected by the General 
Council. No member shall be qualified to act as a member of the Board of 
Trustees who is a non-resident of the Umatilla Indian Reservation. The 
Board of Trustees shall be the sole judge of the qualifications of its 
members.

Section 3. The officers of the Board of Trustees shall be a Chairman, 

a Vice-Chairman, a Treasurer and a Secretary, Their duties shall be as 
follows:

(a)  The Chairman as chief executive officer of the Board of Trustees 
shall preside over all meetings of the Board of Trustees, affix his signa
ture to official documents, countersign warrants duly drawn by the Treasur
er against the tribal funds, and shall vote only in case of a tie.

(b)  The Vice-Chairman shall preside at meetings and otherwise act in 

full capacity of the Chairman in the absence or disability of the Chairman, 
or at his request,

(c)  The Secretary shall conduct all correspondence, issue public no

tices, take minutes, record official actions, have custody of all files and 
records, etc, of the Board of Trustees and affix his signature to official 
documents.

(d)  The Treasurer shall accept, receipt for, and safeguard all funds, 

of the tribes under his custody as directed by the Board of Trustees, and 
keep a complete record of receipts and expenditures. He shall be a bonded 
officer and shall not disburse any funds of the tribes except as duly author
ized by the Board of Trustees, and he shall report his accounts and all 
financial transactions at a meeting upon request of the General Council or 
the Board of Trustees,

The Chairman of the General Council may, but need not necessarily, be 
elected as Chairman of the Board of Trustees. The Board may remove any of 
its officers at any time by a majority vote of the whole Board,

Section 4. The Board of Trustees shall hold regular monthly meetings 
at such time and place as it shall fix. Special meetings of the Board may 
be called by the Chairman of the Board, or by written request of any three 
(3) members thereof, upon at least two (2) days' personal notice of each 
member of the time, place and purpose. At all meetings of the Board, 
whether regular or special, five (5) members shall constitute a quorum. 
All meetings shall be open to any member of the General Council.

Section 5. Whenever, in the opinion of a majority of the entire Board 

of Trustees, any member of the Board of Trustees has been guilty of gross 
neglect of duty, it shall certify its opinion, together with the reasons 
therefor, to the General Council, which shall have the power to remove said 
member from office and to elect a successor. The member who is so accused 
shall have the right to receive a copy of the charges against him at least 
twenty (20) days in advance of the meeting of the General Council at which 
the question of removal and of selection of a successor are to be voted on, 
and shall be entitled to appear at said meeting and answer said charges.

Section 6. Vacancies in the Board of Trustees shall be filled by the 

General Council at an election called for that purpose.

Section 7. The Board of. Trustees shall have custody of its letters, 
documents, records, and minutes, as well as those of the General Council.

Article VII  - Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote of the 

members of the General Council at an election called for that purpose by 
resolution of the Board of Trustees or majority vote of the General. Council, 
provided that such amendment receives at least fifty (50) affirmative votes. 
The notice of said election shall set forth the proposed amendment in full. 
No amendment shall become effective until approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative.

Article VIII  - Ratification

This Constitution and By-laws shall become effective upon ratification 

by a majority vote of those adult members of the Confederated Tribes who 
shall vote as authorized by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and subse
quent approval by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized repre
sentative.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved on May 27, 1949, by the Assistant Com

missioner of Indian Affairs, the attached Constitution and By-laws was duly 
submitted to the adult voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla 
Indian Reservation, Oregon, for ratification, and was on November 4, 1949, 
duly ratified by a vote of 113 for, and 104 against.

Election Committee

Mary E. Dick 
Louise M, Elk 
Aaron Minthorn 
Clarence Burks 
Gilbert E. Conner 
Samuel Kash Kash 
David S. Hall 
Isaac B. Patrick
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 This Constitution and By-laws, having been proposed and duly ratified 

by the adult voters of the Confederated Tribes of the Umatilla Indian 

Reservation, Oregon,on November 4, 1949, at a referendum called by the 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, is herewith approved.

Washington, D. C., December 7, 1949

(Sgd) William E. Warne

Assistant Secretary of the Interior 

