 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

OF THE

COW CREEK BAND OF UMPQUA TRIBE OF INDIANS

OREGON

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
 PREAMBLE ................................................................ 1

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION............................... 1

Section 1.  Name................................................. 1

Section 2.  Reservation Lands and Trust Property.................... 1

Section 3.  Hunting, Fishing,  and Gathering. Rights.................. 2

Section 4.  State Jurisdiction...................................... 2

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP............................................... 2

Section 1.  Requirements..................................   2

Section 2.  Dual Membership Prohibited.............................. 3

SECTION 3.  Adoption...................................   3

Section 4.  Regulation of Membership .....................  3

ARTICLE III - BOARD OF DIRECTORS....................................... 3

Section 1.  Definition of the Governing Body. ...................... 3

Section 2.  Membership.............................................. 3

Section 3.  Tribal Officers........................................ 3

Section 4.  Quorum................  3

Section 5.  Terms of Office........................................ 4

Section 6.  Automatic Succession.................................... 4

ARTICLE IV - TRIBAL ELECTIONS....................................... 4

Section 1.  Voter Qualifications...............  4

Section 2.  Elections............................................. 4

Section 3.  Election Dates......................................... 4

Section 4.  Nominations for the Board of Directors................. 4

Section 5.  Election Committee...................... 5

Section 6.  Qualification for Candidates for

Tribal Board of Directors............................. 5

Section 7.  Election Ordinance.................................. .  5
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE OR FROM 

 
 THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS..........  5

Section 1.  Removal.................... 5

Section 2.  Filling Vacancies......................................6

ARTICLE VI - GENERAL COUNCIL AND RESERVED RIGHTS....................... 6

Section 1.  General Council Membership..................   6

Section 2.  Meetings of the General Council....................... 6

Section 3.  Quorum of the General Council......................... 6

Section 4.  Powers of the General Council . . .. .....................7

Section 5.  Reserved Rights.............. 7

ARTICLE VII - POWERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS......................... 7

Section 1.  General and Enumerated Powers.......... 7

Section 2.  Reserved Powers.................................. .  .  9

ARTICLE VIII - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM................ 10

Section 1.  Initiative..........................  .  . . 10

Section 2.  Referendum............................  10

Section 3.  Non-Binding Referendum. ............................... 10
 
 

ARTICLE IX - RIGHTS OF TRIBAL MEMBERS AND OTHERS 

 
 UNDER JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBE.......................... 11

Section 1.  Rights and Privileges of Members...................... 11

Section 2.  Individual Rights.................................... 11

ARTICLE X - TRIBAL JUDICIARY.......................................... 11

Section 1.  Right of Board of Directors to Establish 

a Tribal Judiciary.....................................  11

Section 2.  Establishment of Tribal Judiciary..................... 11

ARTICLE XI - DUTIES OF OFFICERS........................................ 11

Section 1.  Chairperson...........................................11

Section 2.  Vice-Chairperson...................................... 12

Section 3.  Secretary.....................................  12

Section 4.  Treasurer . ........................................ .12

ARTICLE XII - AMENDMENTS.............................................. 12

ARTICLE XIII - ADOPTION...........................................   13

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY..........  13
 
 

 
CONSTITUTION

COW CREEK BAND OF UMPQUA TRIBE OF INDIANS

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians, create and 
adopt this Constitution for the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians in 
order to form effective tribal government, to secure and protect the powers 
inherent in our sovereign status and guaranteed to us by treaty and Federal 
law, to preserve our culture and tribal identity, to pronate the social and 
economic welfare of our people, to secure, protect, and develop our common 
resources, to maintain peace and order and safeguard individual rights, and 
to advance our mutal welfare. We adopt this Constitution consistent with the 
Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians Recognition Act of December 29, 
1982 (P.L. 97-391), 25 U.S.C.  712, et seq. , as amended by the Cow Creek 
Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians Distribution of Judgeament Funds Act of 
October 26, 1987 (P.L. 100-139), and the Indian Reorganization Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended. This Constitution shall revoke and 
replace all previous governing documents of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
  Section 1. Name.

The legal name of the tribal organization shall be the Cow Creek Band of 
Umpqua Tribe of Indians (herein referred to as "Tribe").

Section 2. Reservation Lands and Trust Property.

The territory and jurisdiction of the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of 
Indians shall extend over the following to the fullest extent possible under 
Federal law:

(a)  All lands, waters, property, air space, other natural resources and any 
interest therein either now, or in the future, owned by the Tribe or 
individual tribal members, and/or held in trust status or located within 
the boundaries of a reservation which has been or may be proclaimed for 
the Tribe, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent or right-of-way.

(b)  All persons, property and activities located or found within the Tribe's 

jurisdiction as authorized by Federal law or this Constitution.

(c)  All members exercising or purporting to. exercise any rights reserved by 
the Tribe under the Treaty of September 19, 1853 (10 Stat. 1027), and 
all property or activity to the extent necessary to implement and 
protect all rights and powers reserved or granted to the Tribe by the 
Treaty of September 19, 1853, the United States Constitution, or Federal 
law.

(d)  The governmental powers of the Tribe shall, consistent with applicable 
Federal law, also extend outside the exterior boundaries of the Tribe's 
Reservation to any persons, subject, or real and personal properties of 
the Tribe which are, or may hereafter be, included within the jurisdic
tion of the Tribe under any law of the United States or of the Tribe.

Section 3. Hunting, Fishing, and Gathering Rights.

Nothing in this Constitution shall restrict the exercise of tribal hunting, 
fishing, and gathering rights, if any, not specifically abrogated by the 
Treaty of September 19, 1853 and existing as of the date on which this 
Constitution is adopted, including the tribal rights to hunt and gather 
within the Tribe's aboriginal lands and to fish at the Tribe's usual and 
accustomed grounds and stations to the extent permitted by Federal law.

Section 4. State Jurisdiction.

Nothing in this Constitution shall be interpreted to grant jurisdiction over 
any lands held in trust for the Tribe or any activities conducted on such 
tribal lands to the State of Oregon or any other State of the United States 
of America. 

Section 1. Requirements.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 The membership of the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians shall consist 
of the following: 

(a)  all persons whose names appear on the official tribal membership roll 
prepared under the Act of October 26, 1987 (Public Law 100-139), as 
amended by the Act of September 27, 1988 (Public Law 100-446), which on 
January 10, 1991, was published in the Federal Register, Vol. 56, No. 7, 
pages 1062 through 1071;

(b)  all persons (including those applicants for enrollment born on or after 
October 26, 1987) who are lineal descendants of any individual whose 
name appears on the official tribal membership roll, excepting, frcm the 
time of the adoption of this Constitution, those who are members of any 
other recognized tribe, band, or community, unless he or she has 
relinquished in writing his or her membership in such other tribe, band 
or community; and, 

.

(c)  all other persons whose eligibility for enrollment as established under 
the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians Distribution of Judgement 
Funds Act of October 26, 1987 (P.L. 100-139), as now codified or as it 
may be amended by Congress in the future, and whose application for 
enrollment is. favorably acted upon by the Board of Directors under 

 relevant governing documents and tribal ordinances.
 
 

 
 
 Section 2. Dual Membership Prohibited.

After the adoption of this Constitution, no person who is an enrolled member 
of any other organized tribe, band, or Indian community officially recognized 
by the Secretary of the Interior shall be eligible for membership in the 
Tribe, unless he or she has relinquished in writing his or her membership in 
such other tribe, band, or community.

Section 3. Adoption.

An individual who has been legally adopted by a tribal member but is other
wise not qualified for membership in the Tribe shall not be admitted to 
membership.

Section 4. Regulation of Membership.

The Board of Directors shall have the authority to enact ordinances 
establishing procedures for processing membership matters including, but not 
limited to, application procedures. Ordinances enacted by the Board of 
Directors governing the correction of the tribal roll, the right to appeal 
from a rejected application for membership, and loss of membership shall be 
subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior. The Board of Directors 
shall enact the appropriate enrollment ordinances within six (6) months of 
the adoption of this Constitution.

Section 1, Definition of the Governing Body.
 
 

ARTICLE III - BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 The governing body of the Tribe shall be known as the Board of Directors.

Section 2. Membership.

The Board of Directors shall consist of 11 members duly elected to terms as 
provided in Section 5 of this Article. All members of the Board of Directors 
at the time this Constitution becomes effective shall continue to serve until 
the end of their terms. 

Section 3. Tribal Officers.

The Board of Directors shall consist of (1) a Chairperson, (2) a Vice 
Chairperson, (3) a Secretary, (4) a Treasurer, and seven (7) members of the 
Board of Directors. Officers shall be elected by the newly formed Board of 
Directors immediately following each annual election.

Section 4. Quorum.

A quorum of the Board of Directors shall consist of six (6) members of the 
Board of Directors.
 
 

 
 
 Section 5. Terms of Office.

Each individual elected to the Board of Directors shall serve for a period of 
four years in accordance with election procedures adopted herein, unless 
removed from office according to the provisions of Article V. At the 1991 
election, those three (3) individuals receiving the largest number of votes 
shall be elected for a period of four years. Those three (3) individuals 
receiving the next highest number of votes shall be elected for a period of 
three years. Those three (3) individuals receiving the next highest number 
of votes shall be elected for a period of two years. Those two (2) 
individuals receiving the next highest number of votes shall be elected for a 
period of one year. Beginning with the 1992 election, each position for 
which the elected term expires shall be filed by election for a four year 
term.

Section 6. Automatic Succession.

If the Chairperson is unwilling or unable to serve, the Vice Chairperson 
shall became Acting Chairperson. If both the Chairperson and Vice 
Chairperson are unwilling or unable to serve, the Board of Directors shall 
elect their successors at a Special Meeting of the Board of Directors 
convened for that purpose by the Secretary and/or the Treasurer.

Section 1. 

Voter Qualifications.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - TRIBAL ELECTIONS

 
 Duly enrolled tribal members shall be qualified to vote if they are at least  
eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the election.

Section 2. 

Elections.

All elections for members of the Board of Directors shall be by secret 
ballot. Absentee voting shall be permitted.

Section 3. 

Election Dates.

Regular elections for the Board of Directors shall be held in August of each 
year at the time of the annual meeting. Notice of election shall be mailed 
to all members of the Tribe at least three weeks in advance of the date of 
the election and posted in the tribal office.

Section 4. 

Nominations for the Board of Directors.

The Board of Directors shall establish procedures for nominations and shall 
publish those procedures at least 30 days in advance of the time of 
nominations.

Section 5. 

Election Committee.

Thee Tribe's Board of Directors shall establish an Election Committee 
comprised of at least three (3) members of the Tribe, at least one of whom 
shall be a current member of the Board of Directors, whose term is not 
expiring at the forthcoming election, who shall be responsible for overseeing 
all tribal elections, registering voters, collecting ballots, tabulating 
votes, reporting the results, and bringing all disputes concerning elections 
before the Board of Directors. These individuals shall serve for a period of 
one year.

Section 6. 

Qualifications for Candidates for Tribal Board of Directors.

Any tribal member who is at least 21 years of age on the date of the election 
and has never been convicted of a felony shall be eligible to serve as a 
member of the Board of Directors and may be nominated as a candidate for that 
office. A tribal member who has been pardoned for all felony convictions 
shall be eligible to serve as a member of the Board of Directors.

Section 7. Election Ordinance.

Within six (6) months of the adoption of this Constitution, consistent with 
the provisions of this Constitution, the Board of Directors shall develop an 
ordinance governing the conduct of tribal elections and the procedures for 
nominations. These procedures shall be posted in the tribal office and 
published in a newsletter and mailed to tribal members at least 30 days prior 
to the time for nominations.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL 
FROM OFFICE OR FROM THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 Section 1. Removal

(a)  Should any of the following circumstances occur involving a member of 
the Board of Directors, the remaining members of the Board of Directors 
may by resolution remove such person from office.

1.  Failure to satisfy the requirements for holding office in Article 

IV, Section 6.

2.  Absence from three (3) successive tribal Board of Directors meetings 

without being excused by the Board of Directors.

3.  Gross misconduct in office, neglect of duty or conviction of a 

felony after his or her election.

4.  Becoming physically or mentally incapable of performing his or her

duties.

(b)  Any member of the Board of Directors subject to removal from the office 
or from the Board of Directors shall, before a vote is taken, be 
provided at least 10 days in advance with a detailed written notice of 
the charges against him or her and with a fair opportunity to reply to 
such charges and present evidence on his or her behalf at an open 
hearing called for that purpose. At least eight (8) of the remaining 
members of the Board of Directors must vote in favor of removal to make 
it valid. The Chairperson shall be permitted to vote if he/she is not 
the object of removal proceedings.

Section 2. Fillings Vacancies.

If any vacancies occur due to removal, resignation or death, the Board of 
Directors shall appoint a new member who qualifies pursuant to Section 6 of 
Article IV, to serve until the next regular election when a successor shall 
be elected to fill the remainder of the term so as to preserve the system of 
staggered terms of office. No vacancies that occur within three (3) months 
of the next regular election shall be filled except that the Board of 
Directors shall fill any vacancies required to maintain a quorum.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - GENERAL COUNCIL AND RESERVED RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. General Council Membership.

The General Council of the Tribe shall consist of all enrolled members of the 
Tribe who are 18 years of age or older.

Section 2. Meetings of the General Council.

The General Council shall hold quarterly meetings during the months of 
February, May, August, and November. Special meetings of the General Council 
may be called by the Chairperson of the Board of Directors or by a majority 
of the members of the Board of Directors. Written notice of such meetings 
shall be posted in the tribal office and shall be mailed to tribal members at 
least 10 days prior to such meeting. The Board of Directors shall call such 
a meeting upon presentation of a properly verified petition signed by at 
least one-third (1/3) or more of the eligible voters of the Tribe. The 
tribal Chairperson or successor or replacement under this Consitution shall 
chair General Council meetings.

Section 3. Quorum of the General Council.

A quorum of the General Council shall consist of 25 voting members of the 
General Council. On issues presented to the General Council by the Board of 
Directors for a vote, a majority vote shall rule, unless otherwise required 
by this Constitution. For the purposes of this Section 3, all members of the 
Board of Directors present shall be counted as members.

 Section 4. Powers of the General Council.

The Board of Directors and other agencies, committees or bodies of the Tribe 

are required to obtain the advice and consent of the General Council prior to 
taking any action with regard to the following powers:

(a)  the relinquishment of any tribal criminal or civil jurisdiction to any 
agency, public or private; provided, however, that this provision shall 
not prevent the Board of Directors from commissioning non-tribal peace 
officers to enforce tribal law and other regulations and ordinances;

(b)  the termination or partial termination or sale of any portion of the 

Tribe's reservation or trust property; and,

(c)  the sale or relinquishment of tribal hunting, fishing or water rights.

Section 5. Reserved Rights.

The General Council retains the following powers:

(a)  electing  the  members of  the  Board of Directors in accordance with

Article IV;

(b)  deciding  on initiative  and  referendum issues in accordance with

Article VIII;

(c)  adopting or rejecting Constitutional amendments in accordance with 

Article XII; and

(d)  all powers not expressly delegated to the Board of Directors.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - POWERS OF THE BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 Section 1. General and Enumerated Powers.

The Board of Directors of the Tribe shall exercise all powers and duties 
delegated to it to the full extent permitted by Federal law. The Board of 
Directors shall be authorized to exercise the following powers, subject to 
any limitations imposed by Federal law or the Constitution of the United 
States, and subject further to all express restrictions upon such powers 
contained in this Constitution:

(a) To. negotiate with the Federal, state, and local governments on behalf of 
the Tribe and to. advise and consult with representatives of the 
Department of the Interior or any other federal, state, or local 
department, agency, or office on all activities of those agencies or 
offices that may affect the Tribe.

(b) To represent the Tribe before Federal, state, and local governments and

their departments and agencies.

(c)  To employ legal counsel, to determine the choice of counsel and fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior 
only so long as and only under such conditions as such approval is 
required by Federal law.

(d)  To administer the affairs and assets of the Tribe, including tribal 
lands, minerals, timber, water rights, funds, and other resources under 
appropriate contract, leases, permits, loans, or sale agreement. In the 
sale or other transfer of tribal lands, the Tribe and the Board of 
Directors shall take every precaution so that the land does not go out 
of trust.

(e)  To administer all federal funds, state funds, county funds, or funds 
from any other agency, organization, or foundation, and all funds from 
tribal business enterprises or to assign such responsibility to such 
persons, committees or companies as it designates.

(f)  To provide for taxes, assessments, permits, and license fees upon 
 members and non-members within the trust lands under the jurisdiction of 

the Tribe.

(g)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Tribe or to assign 
 such responsibility to such persons, committees or companies (including 

tribally chartered corporations) as it designates.

(h)  To appoint committees and officers as necessary to define their duties 

and powers.

(i)  To enact ordinances and laws governing the conduct of all persons or 
tribally-owned land; to maintain order and protect the safety, health, 
and welfare of all persons within the jurisdiction of the Tribe; and to 
enact any ordinances or laws necessary to govern the administration of 
justice, and the enforcement of all laws, ordinances or regulations, 
including the Indian Child Welfare Act.

(j)  To prescribe conditions upon which non-members may remain within the 

territory of the Tribe.

(k)  To charter corporations (including corporations with self perpetuating 
boards), and to charter and regulate cooperatives, associations, special 
districts, education, and charitable institutions, political sub
divisions, and any organizations.
 
 

 
 
 (1)  To enter into loan agreements, joint venture business partnerships, to 
assign business or other income as collateral for loans, and to enter 
into other financial arrangements as required for the development and 
management of business enterprises or land acquisition, including the 
enactment of such ordinances as are necessary or appropriate.

(m)  To purchase or accept any land or other property for the Tribe.

(n)  To request the Secretary of the Interior to confer trust or reservation 

 status on lands granted to or purchased by the Tribe.

(o)  To accept gifts on behalf of the Tribe.

(p)  To deal with questions concerning the encumbrance, lease, use, 
management, assignment, zoning, exchange, mortgage, purchase, 
acquisition, sale, placement in trust and disposal of land, and other 
assets owned by, or held in trust for, the Tribe; and regulate land use 
and development in areas within the Tribe's jurisdiction.

(q)  To assert as a defense to lawsuits against the Tribe, and to waive only 

by express written agreement, the sovereign immunity of the Tribe.

(r)  To enter into grant and contract agreements with any Federal, state, 
county, local or other agency, or private or charitable foundation or 
organization and to submit grant and contract applications to such 
agencies, organizations, etc.

(s)  To develop and implement comprehensive short-term and long-range plans 

for the Tribe.

(t)  To have such other powers and authority necessary to meet its 
obligations, responsibilities, objectives, and purposes as the governing 
body of the Tribe.

(u)  To exercise any power or duty which may now or in the future be 
delegated to. the Board of Directors or to the Tribe by the Federal, 
state, or county governments.

(v)  To employ a Tribal Administrator to assist the Board of Directors in the 
performance of administrative and other duties, and the duties of the 
Tribal Administrator shall be defined by the Board of Directors.

Section 2. Reserved Powers.

(a)  The General Council shall have all other powers not expressly delegated 

to the Board of Directors.

(b)  Notwithstanding the above enumerated powers, the Tribe may exercise all 
other inherent tribal powers not expressly listed without amendment to 
this Constitution. Such powers include those new delegated to the Board 
of Directors and any which the Federal, state, county, or local 
governments may grant to Indian tribes in the future.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1.  Initiative.

The qualified voters may propose legislation by submitting to the Board of 
Directors a petition signed by at least one-third (1/3) of the enrolled 
tribal members 18 years of age or older. Each page of the petition shall 
contain a description of the proposed enactment. Within 30 days from the 
Board of Directors' receipt of a valid petition, the Chairperson shall call 
an election to be held in conjunction with the next regularly scheduled 
meeting of the General Council. A majority of those who vote shall decide 
the issue, provided that at least one-fourth (1/4) of the enrolled tribal 
members 18 years of age or older cast ballots on the proposed legislation. 
The decision of the voters shall be binding on the Board of Directors and 
shall remain in force until amended or rescinded by subsequent action by the 
voters, or until it expires by its own terms.

Section 2. 

Referendum.

The Board of Directors, either upon an Initiative under Section 1 of this 
Article or by an affirmative vote of at least six (6) of its members, shall 
call an election to be conducted within 45 days of such Board of Directors 
decision for the purpose of deciding issues or questions that are either 
within the authority of the General Council as defined in Article VI, or 
those powers vested in the Board of Directors. An affirmative vote of at 
least a majority of those who vote shall be necessary to decide the issue 
or question, provided, that no less than one-fourth (1/4) of the enrolled 
tribal members 18 years of age or older cast ballots in that election. No 
absentee balloting shall be permitted. The decision of the voters shall be 
binding in the same manner as provided in Section 1 of this Article VIII.

Section 3. Non-Binding Referendum.

The Board of Directors, by an affirmative vote of at least six (6) of its 
members, shall call for an election or vote to be conducted within 45 days of 
such Board of Directors decision, for the purpose of soliciting advice from 
the General Council on an issue within the authority of the Board of 
Directors. The results of such votes or elections shall not be binding upon 
the Board of Directors but shall serve to advise the Board of Directors of 
the interests and concerns of the General Council on matters which are 
reserved for decision to the Board of Directors.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - RIGHTS OF TRIBAL MEMBERS 
AND OTHERS UNDER JURISDICTION OF THE TRIBE

 
 Section 1. Rights and Privileges of Members.

Every Tribal Member shall have an equal opportunity to participate in the 
economic resources, programs, and activities of the Tribe and the right to 
exercise traditional rights and privileges of members of the Tribe where not 
in conflict with other provisions of this Constitution, tribal laws and 
ordinances, or the laws of the United States. Where funding is limited, the 
Board of Directors shall have the right to inpose restrictions on access to 
services or to program benefits, tut such restrictions shall not be based on 
sex, political affiliation, religious beliefs, or membership in any specific 
family of the Tribe.

Section 2. Individual Rights.

This Constitution and the Tribal Government it establishes shall not encroach 
upon or limit any person's right to enjoy freedom of worship, conscience, 
speech, press, assembly and association, and such other rights as are 
guaranteed by Federal law including the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (87 
Stat. 77).
 
 

ARTICLE X - TRIBAL JUDICIARY

 
 Section 1. Right of Board of Directors to Establish a Tribal Judiciary.

If the Board of Directors should determine that there is a substantial need 
for a tribal judiciary system and that the adequate funding is available to 
establish and maintain such a system, the Board of Directors may establish a 
tribal judiciary system and provide or authorize support for that system.

Section 2. Establishment of Tribal Judiciary.

The Board of Directors shall determine, by ordinance, the judicial powers and 
authorities of the judiciary, the number of judges and staff to be appointed, 
the manner of appointment and removal from office, the rate of compensation, 
the qualifications for office, and shall appropriate such funds as needed to 
enable the tribal judiciary to carry out its responsibilities.
 
 

 ARTICLE XI - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chairperson.

The Chairperson of the Board of Directors shall preside over all meetings of 
the Board of Directors and of the General Council. He/she shall perform all 
duties' of the Chairperson and exercise any authority delegated to him/her by 
the Board of Directors.

Section 2. Vice Chairperson.

The Vice Chairperson shall act as Chairperson and perform the duties of the
Chairperson in the Chairperson's absence.

Section 3. 

Secretary.

The Secretary shall keep a complete record of minutes of all business 
conducted by. the Board of Directors at its meetings and of the business 
conducted by the General Council at its meetings. The Secretary shall be 
responsible for tribal correspondence and reports, unless such 
responsibilities are delegated to an employee of the Tribe or other Board of 
Directors members. The Secretary shall chair meetings in the absence of the 
Chairperson or Vice Chairperson. The Board of Directors may delegate an 
assistant or recording secretary to assist the Secretary in the performance 
of his/her duties.

Section 4. 

Treasurer.

The Treasurer of the Tribe shall be required to furnish a bond satisfactory 
to the Board of Directors. The Teasurer shall keep complete and accurate 
records of all funds in the custody of the Board of Directors. The Treasurer 
shall provide a written report on all receipts and expenditures and accounts 
and the nature of all funds in his/her possession or custody to the 
membership at their quarterly General Council meetings and shall provide a 
written monthly report to the Board of Directors. The books and records of 
the Treasurer shall be audited at least once a year by a competent auditor.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the enrolled members 
of the Tribe 18 years of age and older voting at an election called for that 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior PROVIDED, that at least 30 percent 
of those eligible to vote shall vote in such an election, but no amendment 
shall became effective until it has been approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior. The Board of Directors may establish a system for registration of 
voters prior to any vote but all enrolled tribal members 18 years of age or 
older will be entitled to vote provided they are registered.

Amendments to the Constitution may be proposed either by the Board of 
Directors or the General Council. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of 
the Interior to call an election on any proposed Amendment upon receipt of a 
valid petition signed by at least one-third (1/3) of the enrolled members of 
the Tribe 18 years of age or older, or by a resolution passed by an 
affirmative vote of at least six (6) member of the Board of Directors. In 
the case of Amendments to the Constitution, absentee voting will be 
permitted.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters of 
the Cow Creek Band of Umpqua Tribe of Indians, voting at an election called 
for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior and conducted in accordance 
with Federal law in which at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall 
vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, 
and, if approved, shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY

 
 Should any provision of this Constitution in the future be held invalid by a 
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid portion shall be severed and the 
remaining provisions shall continue in force and effect.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order issued on May 17, 1991, by Ronal Eden, Director, Office 
of Tribal Services, the foregoing Constitution of the Cow Creek Band of 
Umpqua Tribe of Indians, Oregon, was submitted to the qualified registered 
voters of the tribe and was on July 8, 1991, duly adopted by a 
vote of 178 for, and 35 against, in an election in which at least thirty 
percent (30%) of the 25 2 (number) entitled to vote, cast their ballots in 
accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended.

ATTESTED TO:
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 /s/ Ronal Eden

I, ______________ ______________ , Director, Office of Tribal Services, by 
virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to me by
230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve the Constitution of the Cow Creek Band of 
Umpqua Tribe of Indians of Oregon, PROVIDED, That nothing contained in this 
approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this constitution 
that would be contrary to Federal law.

Washington, D.C.

Date: JUL 17 1991

