 
 THE 
 

DOCUMENT EMBODYING 

THE LAWS, CUSTOMS AND TRADITIONS 

OF THE

COYOTE VALLEY BAND OF POMO INDIANS

PREAMBLE


We, the Coyote Valley Band of Pomo Indians, being 

a sovereign native people, in order to organize for our common 

good, to maintain and foster our tribal culture, to protect 

and conserve our land and natural resources, to promote the 

social, economical and general welfare of our people, to 

maintain peace and order, and secure the rights and powers 

inherent in our sovereign status, guaranteed to us by the 

laws of the United States, do hereby establish and adopt 

this Document which from this time forward shall govern the 

Coyote Valley Band of Pomo Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - PURPOSE

 
 The Coyote Valley Band of Pomo Indians herein

after referred to as the Band, pursuant to the Act of June 

18, 1934 (48 Stat. 934), adopts this Document which shall 

henceforth constitute the governing document of the Band, 

for the purposes of governing ourselves, under our own 

laws, customs, and traditions, free from state regulation: 

and control; and for the purpose of-establishing a legally 

recognized tribal government.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. Territory and Jurisdiction.

The jurisdiction of the Band, its General Council, 

its Tribal Council and its tribal courts shall extend to the 

following:

a.  All lands, water and other resources within the 

exterior boundaries of what now comprises the Coyote Valley 

Indian Reservation, as described in the deed recorded in Book 

1230, Page 339, Official Records of the County of Mendocino;

b.  All other lands, water and resources as may be 

hereafter acquired by the Band, whether within or without said 

boundary lines, under any grant; transfer, purchase adjudicati 

treaty, Executive Order, Act of Congress or other acquisition;

c.  All persons within any territory under the 

jurisdiction of the Band; and

d.  All Band members exercising hunting and fishing 

rights within the exterior boundaries of the Coyote Valley 

Rancheria as established by the Acts of June 21, 1906 (34 Stat. 

325, 333) and April 30, 1908 (35 Stat. 70, 76).
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1.  Members

The following persons shall be members of the Tribe, 

provided that such persons shall first have made application for 

membership according to the Tribe's enrollment code and provided 

further that no person who is a member of any other Indian nation, 

tribe, band, community, village or colony shall at the same time be a 

member of the Tribe:

a.  All persons whose names appear on the Coyote Valley 

Band of Pomo Indians Membership Register of September 12, 2012 

(hereinafter referred to as the “Tribal Base Roll”).

b.  All persons who are lineal descendants of any persons 

designated in subsection (a).

Section 2. Enrollment Procedures

The Tribal Council shall have the power to regulate 

the enrollment of tribal members as follows:

a.  The Tribal Council shall enact statutes govern

ing enrollment and disenrollment procedures and corrections 

of the tribal roll .

b.  The Tribal Council shall have the power to 

correct the original or current tribal roll at any time by 

adding the names of the persons who should have been included 

or deleting the names of person who have relinquished their 

tribal membership or who were incorrectly included in the 

roll.

c.  Any person subject to removal from the tribal 

roll shall be provided with reasonable notice of the proposed 

action and an opportunity to present evidence on his or her 

behalf.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1.  Organization

The powers of the government of the Band shall be 

divided into three distinct branches, the General Council, 

the Tribal Council, and Tribal Judiciary, and no branch, 

group or person charged with the exercise of powers properly 

belonging to one of these branches shall exercise any powers 

properly belonging to one of the other branches, except as 

otherwise specified in this Document.

Section 2.  Name

The governing body of the Band shall be the General 

Council. In addition, there shall be elected from the General 

Council a Tribal Council.

Section 3.  Powers

The General Council shall exercise all powers of 

self-government through the initiative, referendum, repeal and 

recall procedures specified in Articles XI, XII, and XIII, 

of this Document. The Tribal Council shall exercise, con

currently with the General Council, all powers delegated 

to it by the General Council, and otherwise vested in the 

Tribal Council by this Document. The Tribal government shall 

exercise its powers of self-government pursuant to its own 

inherent sovereignty and pursuant to those powers which 

have been delegated to it by the United States of America.
 
 

ARTICLE V - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Electorate

All tribal members eighteen (18) years of age

or older shall be members of the General Council of the

Coyote Valley Band and shall be eligible to vote in all 

tribal elections, referenda, recalls, repeals and at all 

meetings of the General Council.

Section 2. Meetings of the General Council

a. All meetings of the General Council shall be 

open to all tribal members, and shall be held in accordance 

with the following provisions:

1.  Frequency. The General Council shall 

meet at least four (4) times each year, on 

the first Saturday of March, June, 

September and December. When the 

regularly scheduled General Council 

meeting falls on a holiday, it shall be 

held on the following work day.

2.  Notice. Written notice shall be mailed 

to each member at the beginning of each 

year setting forth the dates on which 

General Council meetings will be held.

3.  Quorum. At all meetings of the General 

Council a quorum shall be present constitute

ing (twenty)(20%) of the total voting 

membership of the Band. In the event a 

quorum is not present no further business 

will be conducted and the meeting will be 

adjourned.

4.  Voting. Each voting member of the General

Council has one vote on all matters  and

all matters to be acted on at a General 

Council meeting shall be approved or dis

approved by a majority vote of those 

present and voting unless otherwise speci

fied in this Document .

Section 3. Officers of the General Council

At the regularly scheduled annual election of tribal 

council persons, the General Council shall elect a (President, 

Chief, etc.) who shall preside at the meetings of the General 

Council.

Section 4. Duties of the (President, Chief)

The (President, Chief, etc.) of the General Council 

shall exercise the following powers:

a.  To preside over the meetings of the General 

Council and vote on all issues before the General Council;

b.  To call special meetings of the General 

Council;

c.  To veto enactments of the Tribal Council 

as provided in Article XIII of this Docuemnt; and

d.  To prepare and cause to be published at 

least five days before the meeting, an agenda for each General 

Council meeting. The agenda shall include but not be limited t 

(1) a report by the tribal treasurer of the finances of the 

tribal Government during the quarter immediately preceding 

the meeting and (2) a list of all the laws enacted by the 

Tribal Council, during the quarter immediately preceding the 

meeting, with a short summary explaining each law. During the 

meeting the (President) will ensure that this agenda, include

ing the financial report, will be available for inspection 

by any member of the General Council upon request. All items 

on the agenda will be considered by the General Council before 

considering matters form from the floor. 

Section 5. Special Meetings

Special meetings of the General Council may be 

called by the (President), the Tribal Council or by (ten) 

members of the General Council. The notice in regards to 

any special meeting shall be the same as that specified for 

regular meetings of the General Council.

Section 6. Powers of the General Council

a.  All powers of the Band shall be vested 

in the General Council, including those powers delegated to 

the Tribal Council and any other such powers as may in the 

future be granted or delegated to the Band by federal law.

b.  The General Council shall exercise its 

powers of self-government through the initiative, referen

dum, repeal and recall powers as set forth in Articles XI, 

XII and XIII, of this Document.

c.  The following powers shall be exclusive

ly reserved to the General Council. No exercise of these 

powers by the Tribal Council or by any other agency or 

officer of the Band shall be effective unless the General 

Council has given its consent to such action in accordance 

with Article VII of this Document:

1. 

The powers to sell or relinquish 

land owned by the Band or land held 

in trust for the Band by the United 

States of America;

2. 

The power to sell or relinquish 

any tribal hunting or fishing rights;

3. 

The power to terminate the Coyote 

Valley Rancheria or Coyote Valley 

Reservation;

4. 

The power to grant or relinquish 

any tribal jurisdiction to any other 

government, political subdivision of 

a government, agency, organization, 

association, or person;

5. 

The power to revoke, terminate or 

diminish a right reserved or delegated to 

the Band by federal law;

6. 

The power to waive the Band’s immunity 

from suit; and

7. 

The power to adopt persons of Indian 

blood into the membership of the Band.

All powers that are not expressly mentioned in this 

Document or which are not expressly delegated in this Document by 

the General Council to the Tribal Council or any other officer or 

agency of the Band, shall not be abridged but shall be reserved 

to the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Governing Body

In addition to the General Council, there shall be 

elected from the General Council a Tribal Council. The Tribal 

Council shall be composed of seven persons elected by the General 

Council. The Tribal Council shall exercise, concurrently with the 

General Council, all powers delegated to it by the General Council 

in Article XII of this Document and otherwise vested in the Tribal 

Council by this Document. 

Section 2. Qualifications.

All members of the General Council who are residents of

Lake, Mendocino, Humboldt or Sonoma Counties, California and who 

are (18) years of age or older shall be eligible to serve as 

members of the Tribal Council, provided however that no more than 

one "immediate family member" of any person already on the Tribal 

Council may serve on the Tribal Council. For the purposes of this sec 

one "immediate family member" shall mean mother, father, brother, siste 

spouse or child.

Section 3. Election and Terms of Officers.

a.  Statement of Intent. Any qualified member of the Ban 

who desires that his or her name be placed on the ballot as a candi 

for the office of (President, Principle Chief, Captian), chairman, v 

chairman, secretary, treasurer, historial or council member in the 

primary or general election shall file with the tribal secretary a 

statement of intent stating his or her name, address and the office 

which he or she desires to become a candidate. Such statement shall 

filed not less than sixty (60) days prior to the next general or spe 

election; provided however, if only one qualified member files a

statement of intent for a tribal office a special meeting of the gene 

council shall be convened for the purpose of taking nominations from 

the floor for a candidate or candidates for that office; provided 

further however that not more than the first three (3) nominations wi 

be accepted from the floor for any one office.

b. Primary Election. Where three of more persons have 

filed a statement of intent with the tribal secretary, pursuant to 

Section 4(a) above, a primary election for that office shall be held 

at least thirty (30) days before the general election of the Band. Th 

two nominees receiving the highest number of votes for a particular 

office shall be the only candidates for that office at the next genera 

election.

c. Election Dates. General elections to vote for tribal co 

members and all elected officers of the Band shall be held annually on 

the first Saturday of December. Notice of both the primary and gene 

elections shall be posted at least 

thirty (30) days before each such election at the Band's business 

office, the voting place and in three (3) or more additional publi 

places. Such notice shall be posted by the secretary of the 

tribal council. In case the time of the general election should 

conflict with a holiday the election shall be held on the follow

ing work day.

d. Elections. The first election of tribal 

officers under this Document shall be held on the first general 

election date following its adoption and ratification. The tribal 

secretary shall post the names of all candidates for tribal office 

at the Band's business office, the voting place and at three or 

more additional public places at least (ten) (10) days before the 

primary and general election. The candidate receiving the highest

 number of votes for a particular office shall hold that office.

e.  Terms of Office. At the first election held 

pursuant to this Document the candidate receiving the highest 

number of votes for the office of:

1. 

(President) of the General Council 

shall hold that office for a period of 

four (4) years;

2.  Chairman of the Tribal Council shall 

hold that office for a period of 

four (4) years;

3.  Vice Chairman of the Tribal Council 

shall hold that office for a period 

of three (3) years;

4. 

Secretary of the Tribal Council shall 

hold that office for a period of three 

(3) years;

5.  Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall 

hold that office for a period of two 

(2) years;

6.  Historian of the Tribal Council shall 

hold that office for a period of one 

(1) year.

For all subsequent elections held pursuant to this 

Document the candidates receiving the highest number of votes fo 

a particular tribal office shall hold that office for the follow 

term: (1) President of the General Council four (4) years;

(2)  Chairman of the Tribal Council four (4) years; (3) Vice-

Chairman of the Tribal Council four (4) years; (4) Secretary 

of the Tribal Council four (4) years; (5) Treasurer of the Tribe 

Council four (4) years; (6) Historian of the Tribal Council four 

(4) years and (7) Council Person of the Tribal Council four (4) 

years.

f.  Candidacy. No person shall be a candidate for 

more than one office in any primary or general election.

g.  Tie Vote. A tie vote shall be decided only by 

holding a general election within 30 days from the date of the 

previous general election that resulted in a tie. The person 

receiving the highest number of votes for the particular office 

shall hold that office. 

Section 4. Duties of Officers.

a. 

Chairperson. The chairperson shall exercise 

the following powers as the chief executive officer of the Band:

1.  To preside over and vote at all meetings 

of the Tribal Council;

2.  Subject to the approval of the Tribal 

Council, to appoint all non-elected 

officials and employees of the tribal 

government and direct them in their work, 

subject only to applicable restrictions 

embodied in this Document or in enactments 

of the Tribal Council establishing personnel 

policies or government personnel management;

3.  Subject to the approval of the Tribal

Council, to establish such boards, commit

tees, or sub-committees as the business of 

the tribal council may require, and to 

serve as an ex-officio member of all such 

committees and boards;

4.  Subject to the approval of all contracts 

by the Tribal Council, to serve as a con

tracting officer or agent for the Band 

including the authority to retain legal 

counsel;

5.  Subject to such regulations and procedures as 

may be prescribed by statute, enacted by the 

Tribal Council and subject to approval by the 

Tribal Council, to grant pardons or restore 

Tribal members to eligibility f 

office in the tribal government;

7.  Subject to the approval of the Tribal 

Council, to appoint tribal judges, tribal 

law enforcement officials as are from 

time to time required to assure the 

administration and enforcement of tribal laws; a

8.  The chairperson shall hold no other tribal 

office or engage in private renumerative 

employment which may pose a conflict of 

interest with the Bands enterprises or 

business activities during his term of office.

b.  Vice Chairman. The vice-chairperson shall, with th 

consent of the Tribal Council, in the absence of the chairperson, 

perform all duties and assume all the responsibilities vested in th 

chairperson. The vice-chairperson shall, upon the request of the 

chairperson, assist in carrying out the duties of the chairperson. 

vice -chairperson shall perform such other duties as the chairperson 

may direct.

c.  Secretary. The secretary shall call the roll, handle 

all official correspondence of the Tribal Council, keep the minutes 

of all regular and special meetings of the Tribal and General Counci 

and certify to the Superintendent of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, 

Central California Agency, the duly elected officers of the tribal 

and general council within fifteen (15) days from the date of any 

election. In the absence of the chair

person and vice-chairperson, with the consent of the Tribal Counc 

the Secretary shall carry on the duties of the chairperson, subjec 

to all restrictions embodied in this Document.

d.  Treasurer. The treasurer shall have the follow

ing powers and duties:

1.  To accept, receipt for, keep and safe

guard all funds under the exclusive 

control of the Band by depositing them 

in a bank insured by an agency of the 

Federal Government, or in an I.I.M. 

Account or tribal trust account with 

the Bureau of Indian Affairs, as 

directed by the Tribal Council and 

shall keep or cause to be kept an

accurate record of such funds and shall 

report on all receipts and expenditures 

and the amount and nature of all funds 

in his or her custody to the Tribal 

and General Councils at regular meetings 

and at such other times as requested by 

either Council. The treasurer shall not 

pay or otherwise disburse any funds in 

the custody of the Tribal Council except 

when properly authorized to do so by 

the Tribal Council;

2.  The books and records of the treasurer 

shall be audited at least once a year by 

a competent independent auditor employed by 

the Tribal Council, and at such other times 

as the Tribal Council or General Council may 

direct;

3.  The treasurer may be required to give a surety 

bond satisfactory to the Tribal Council

4.  The treasurer shall be present at all meetings 

of the Tribal and General Councils unless preven 

by illness of circumstances beyond his / her contr

5.  All checks drawn on tribal funds shall be signed 

and all vouchers shall be approved for payment 

by the treasurer and at least one officer or

designated check signer of the Band in accordance 

with the written procedure approved and adopted by 

the Tribal Council by resolution; and

6.  In the absence of the chairperson, vice-chairperso 

and the Secretary, with the approval of the Tribal 

Council, the Treasurer shall carry out the duties 

of the Chairperson.

e.  Historian. The Historian shall be responsible for 

compling a permanent written or taped account of the history 

of the Band . Specifically, the historian shall record the historical 

spiritual and social traditions of the Band by interviewing Band 

elders, members and others, and by seeking out any 

and all sources of information pertaining to the Band. The 

historian shall make a quarterly report to the Tribal Council on 

the progress of his or her duties and at the end of the term of hi 

or her office, shall submit a final report to the Tribal Council 

for their approval. 

Section 5. Bonding.

The Tribal Council may require all responsible tribal 

officials and employees to be bonded. The person responsible for 

the cost of such bonding to be determined by the Tribal Council. 

Section 6. Tribal Council Meetings.

All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be opened to 

all tribal members, except in those cases where the matter under 

discussion would invade the privacy of an individual Band member. 

Meetings shall be held in accordance with the following provisions:

a.  Frequency. Meetings of the Tribal Council 

shall be held on the Coyote Valley Indian Reservation or at the

Band's administrative offices in Ukiah at least once a month or 

as may be fixed by resolution of the Tribal Council. The Council 

may set more frequent regular meetings as necessary, provided that 

it shall cause to be published the schedule of all such meetings.

b. 

Quorum. A majority of the voting members of the 

Tribal Council shall constitute a quorum at all Council meetings.

c. 

Proxy Votes. A proxy vote maybe approved by 

the Tribal Council for absences caused only by illness, military 

service, hospitalization or approved Tribal business. Requests to 

the Tribal Council to vote by proxy shall be in writing and signed 

by the requesting council person.

d. 

Meeting Notice. At least ten (10) days notice shall 

given by the Chairperson, unless a regular time is specified by co 

resolution.

e. 

Absences. Absences from regular meetings must be 

execused by a majority vote of the council members present. As pr 

in Article X Section 1 unexcused absences not approved by majority 

of the Tribal Council shall be cause for removal of a council membe 

from office.

f. 

Special Meetings. Special meetings of the council ma 

be called by the Chairperson or by any four (4) members of the 

Council. The notice in regard to any special meeting shall be given 

at leas (7) days prior to the meeting and shall specify the purpose 

of the meeting. Emergency meetings may be provided for in a Tribal 

Council resolution.

g. 

Voting. Each member of the Tribal Council shall have 

one vote on all matters, and all matters to be acted on at a Tribal 

Council meeting shall be approved or disapproved by a majority vote 

of those present and voting, unless provided to the contrary in this 

Document.

h. 

Statutes, Codes and Resolutions. Copies of all statute 

codes, resolutions or ordinances adopted by the Tribal Council, its 

committees and sub-committees shall be maintained at the tribal offic 

and shall be available for inspection, upon reasonable notice, to all 

enrolled members of the Band.

Section 7. Procedures and Compensation. Except as provided in 

this Document, the Tribal Council shall establish its own 

rules of procedure. The General Council may set com 

Tribal Council members, officers and committee members as it 

believes is advisable.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The General Council hereby delega 

to the Tribal Council the following enumerated powers subject only 

to those limitations imposed by this Document.

a.  Conduct Governmental Relations. On behalf of 

the Band, to consult, negotiate, contract, or conclude agreements 

with federal, state, local and tribal governments and with private 

persons and organizations;

b.  Employ Consultants. To employ legal counsel 

of its choice on behalf of the Band or for the benefit of Band 

members and to fix the fees for such counsel in accordance with 

federal law.

c.  Consult Department of the Interior. To make 

recommendations to the Secretary of the Interior, or to his 

authorized representative, with regard to all appropriation 

estimates for all projects which are for the benefit of members of 

the Band, prior to the submission of such estimates to the office 

of Management and Budget and Congress, or to the State of Califor

nia;

d.  Manage Tribal Business Affairs. To borrow 

money from public and private sources and to pledge, mortgage or 

assign tribal assets except as provided in Sections 2, 3, 4, 5, 

of this Article;

e.  Administer Tribal Funds. To set aside and to 

spend tribal funds for tribal purposes;

f.  Levy Taxes and Fees. To impose taxes on all 

persons, property and business activities located or conducted 

within tribal jurisdiction; provided no tax shall be imposed on 

real property held in trust by the United States of America;

g.  Manage Tribal Lands. To regulate the use and 

development of all tribal lands, whether assigned, or unassigned, 

and to manage, lease, or otherwise use all unassigned tribal 

lands. Toward this end, the Tribal Council shall, within one 

year of the effective date of this Document, submit for approval 

to the General Council a land assignment and a land use law;

h.  Establish Corporations and Businesses. To 

charter and regulate corporations, cooperatives, associations, 

special districts, housing authorities, educational and chari

table institutions, political subdivisions and other entities;

i. 

Regulate Businesses. To license and regulate 

the conduct of all business activities within tribal jurisdiction;

j.  Promote Economic Development. To establish 

business enterprises as branches or agncies of the tribal govern

ment and, otherwise to engage in business activities and projects 

which promote the economic well-being of the Band and its members;

k.  Purchase Lands. To purchase and to acquire in 

other ways land and other property;

l.  Condemnation. To condem for tribal purposes 

real property or interest in real property within tribal 

jurisdiction; provided that the owners of assignments or property 

condemned by the Tribal council shall be paid fair market value 

for the assignment or property, and all improvements made thereon 

by the assignee or owner, and provided further that an assignee 

of condemned tribal lands shall be assigned alternative tribal 

lands of comparable condition and value; and provided further that 

no assignments shall be condemned without the approval of the 

General Council;

m.  Conserve Natural Resources. To manage, develop, 

protect and regulate the use of water, minerals, and all other 

natural resources within Tribal jurisdiction;

n.  Promote the General Welfare: Enact Tribal 

Laws, Statutes and Codes. To enact laws, statutes and codes 

governing conduct of individuals and proscribing offenses against 

the Band; to maintain order to protect the safety and welfare of 

all persons within tribal jurisdiction; and to provide for the 

enforcement of the laws and codes of the Band;

o.  Judicial System. To establish tribal courts or 

courts of Indian offenses, from time to time as may be required, 

and to provide for the court or courts jurisdiction, procedures 

and a method for the selection of judges;

p.  Trespass. To prescribe conditions under which 

non-members may enter and remain on the reservation and to 

establish procedures for the exclusion of non-members from any 

land within the Band's jurisdiction;

q.  Defend Against Lawsuits. To assert as a 

defense to lawsuits against the Band the sovereign immunity of 

the Band; except that no waiver of sovereign immunity can be 

made by the Tribal Council without prior approval of the General 

Council;

r.  Regulate Domestic Affairs. To regulate the 

domestic relations of members of the Band; to provide for the 

guardianship of minors and incompetent persons within tribal 

jurisdiction; to provide services for the health, education 

and welfare of all persons within tribal jurisdiction;

s.  Probate Power. To regulate the inheritance 

of all lands within tribal jurisdiction and all property owned by 

persons within tribal jurisdiction and to provide for escheat 

of property to the Band; provided that no law, statute, code or 

ordinance governing the inheritance of property owned by tribal 

members shall be in violation of federal law;

t.  Election of Officers. To enact ordinances 

consistant with this Document establishing procedures for the 

nomination and election of tribal officers;

u.  Tribal Business Administrator. To appoint, 

direct and set the compensation of a Tribal Business Administrator 

or Manager; and to establish policies and procedures for the 

employment of tribal personnel;

v.  Delegate Authority. Subject to any limitations 

contained in this Document to delegate any powers vested in the 

Tribal Council to subordinate tribal officers, tribal employees 

or other appropriate persons; and

w.  Reserve Power. To take all actions which are 

necessary and proper for the exercise of the powers enumerated 

in this Document and which are otherwise consistent with, and in 

furtherance of, tribal customs, traditions, and beliefs, and 

any other powers, which may hereafter be vested in the Tribal Counci 

Section 2. Reserve Powers of General Council.

The Tribal Council shall have all the appropriate powers 

necessary to implement specific provisions of this Document and 

to effectively govern tribal affairs. All powers heretofore 

vested in the Band, but not specifically referred to in this 

Document, shall not be abridged, but shall be reserved to the 

General Council. 

Section 3. Limited Power to Transfer Tribal Land Out Of Tribal 

Ownership.

The Tribal Council shall not transfer land or interests 

therein out of tribal ownership by any means unless, prior to any 

such proposed transfer taking effect, such proposed transfer is 

approved by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the General Council 

provided that at least one hundred (100) person who are entitled 

to vote are present and by the Secretary of Interior; Provided 

However, the Tribal Council may exchange, prior to becoming tribal 

lands, provided however, effectice, such exchanges shall be approved 

by a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the General Council. 

Section 4. Limited Power To Encumber Tribal Land.

a.  Except as permitted by Subsection (b) of this 

section, the Tribal Council shall not pledge, mortgage, lease, 

grant licenses to use land (whether revocable or irrevocable) 

or otherwise encumber tribal land or interests therein, unless 

it is approved by the Secretary of Interior, and by a vote of a 

majority of the General Council voting on the question, Provided 

That at least fifty (50) persons who are entitled to vote are 

present.

b.  The Tribal Council may authorize the following 

encumberances by a vote of a majority of the entire Tribal 

Council:

1.  Grants of permission to members of 

the Band and qualified non-members 

in accordance with provisions of 

this Document, to use specified 

portions of tribal land for 

residential, agricultural, commercial 

or industrial purposes.

2.  Grants of rights-of-way over tribal 

land or interests therein; for the 

purposes of providing municipal 

services, such as water, sewer

disposal, electricity, telephone

and roads, to and for the benefit of 

tribal members, or the heirs and 

descendants of tribal members who 

hold a land use assignment or lease. 

Section 5. Limited Power to Develop Natural Resources.

The Tribal Council shall not develop on a commercial 

or industrial basis any natural resources of the Band without 

the consent of a majority vote of the General Council, provided 

that at least fifty (50) persons who are entitled to vote are 

present.

Section 6. Principle of Construction.

Section 5, 6, and 7 of this Article shall not be 

construed to deny to the Tribal Council its governmental power 

and authority to regulate activities of tribal land for the 

Band's general welfare, including but not limited to zoning, the 

regulation of commercial ventures, fishing, hunting and other 

sports activities, and for the purpose of promoting the health, 

safety, and welfare of Band members and the conservation and 

protection of tribal resources.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - REVIEW AND APPROVAL OF ENACTMENTS 

 
 Section 1. Approval by (President).

Any and every law passed by the Tribal Council shall, 

before it becomes effective, be presented to the (President) 

of the General Council for his or her approval within five (5) 

days following the date of its passage by the Tribal Council. 

If the (President, Principle Chief) approves of the law he or 

she will sign it and deposit it with the Tribal Secretary within 

ten (10) days following its receipt from the Tribal Council. 

All tribal laws shall become effective on the date they are 

signed by the (President) of the General Council or as otherwise 

specified in this Document.

Section 2. Veto of (President) and Overriding Veto.

If the (President) does not sign an enactment of the 

Tribal Council, he or she shall within ten (10) days from the 

date it was submitted to the (President) by the Tribal Council 

for his or her signature, return it to the Tribal Council, by 

depositing it, with a statement as to why he or she is vetoing 

the enactment, with the Tribal Secretary. The enactment there

after shall not become effective unless within ten (10) days 

from receipt from the (President) the Tribal Council overrides 

the veto of the (President) by a unanimous vote of the entire 

Tribal Council. Any and every law so passed by the Tribal 

Council pursuant to this section shall be presented to the 

General council, at a duly convened special meeting, for approval 

within fifteen (15) days following the date that the Tribal 

Council overrides the veto of the (President). If the General 

Council approves the enactment by a majority vote, providing a 

quorum is present, the law will immediately become effective. 

If the General Council does not approve the enactment or a 

sufficient quorum is not present then the enactment shall 

immediately be considered repealed and void. It shall there

after not become effective unless it is approved by the General 

Council at a duly convened meeting of the General Council.

Section 3. Approval by the Secretary of the Interior.

The Tribal Council may as it deems appropriate submit 

a tribal law to the Secretary of the Interior for his review, 

correct and or approval. However, the failure of the Tribal 

Council to submit any tribal law to the Secretary of the Interior 

or the failure of the Secretary to approve any tribal law so 

submit, shall in no way effect the legal validity of any tribal 

law duly enacted pursuant to this Document.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Election Board.

An election board, appointed by the chairperson and 

approved by the Tribal Council, shall supervise and administer 

all elections in accordance with a tribal law enacted by the 

Tribal Council in accordance with this Constitution; Provided That 

no member of the election board shall be at the same time a 

member of the Tribal Council or a candidate for tribal office. 

Section 2. Eligible Voters.

Any member of the Coyote Valley General Council shall 

have the right to vote in any tribal election.

Section 3. Ballot and Absentee Voting.

Members of the Tribal Council, and all other elective 

officials of the Band, shall be chosen by secret ballot, the 

form of which shall be established by tribal law enacted by the 

Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall also provide by tribal 

law, provisions for absentee voting, including the use of a 

secret ballot for this purpose.

Section 4. Election Date.

General elections to vote for tribal council members 

and all elected officers of the Band shall be held annually on 

the (1st) (Saturday) of December. Notice of any primary and 

general elections shall be posted at least (thirty) (30) days 

before each such election at the voting place, tribal office 

and in (three) (3) or more additional public places. Such notice 

shall be posted by the Secretary of the Tribal Council. In case 

the time of the general election should conflict with a holiday 

the election shall be held on the following work day. 

Section 5. First Elections.

The first tribal election to adopt this Document shall 

be held pursuant to federal law as defined in 25 C.F.R. 52 et seq. 

The first election of Tribal Council members and officers of the 

Band under this Document shall be held on the first general electio 

date following its adoption and ratification. Thereafter, all 

elections shall be conducted in accordance with this Document 

and tribal law.

Section 1. Vacancy on Council.
 
 

ARTICLE X - VACANCIES

 
 If any member of the tribal council or any elected 

officer of the Band during the term of this office, shall die, 

resign or be absent from regular Tribal or General Council meet

ings two (2) successive unexcused times, or three (3) unexcused 

times in any twelve (12) month period, the Tribal Council or the 

General Council shall declare the position vacant. If a member 

of the Tribal Council or any elected officer of the Band, during 

the term of his office, is convicted of any felony or found guilty 

of any crime involving moral turpitude, or commits any act which 

will reflect on the dignity and integrity of the tribal govern

ment, the Tribal or General Council may declare the position vaca 

by a majority vote. If less than twelve (12) months of the term 

remains, the Tribal Council shall fill the vacancy by appointment 

of a tribal member who qualifies for candidacy to the vacant 

position. If more than twelve (12) months remain in the unexpired 

term, a special election shall be called to fill the vacant 

position.
 
 

ARTICLE XI  - REMOVAL AND RECALL 

 
 Section 1. Removal.

Any member of the Tribal Council charged during his 

or her term of office with neglect of duty, misconduct in office, 

or any offense involving dishonesty, may be removed from office 

as follows:

a.  Written Charges. Any member of the Tribal 

Council can request removal of any Tribal Council member by 

submitting a written statement of charges to the Chairperson of 

the Tribal Council or, in the case of a request for removal of the 

Chairperson, to the Vice Chairperson of the Council. Such 

written statement must be received by the accused council member 

no later than twenty (20) days before the next regular council 

meeting at which he or she is to appear.

b.  Evidence. At the next regular council meeting 

following the submission of such written statement, the charging 

party shall present his or her allegations and proof against the 

accused member of the Tribal Council, and the accused member shall 

be given an opportunity to reply to all charges by presenting 

his or her allegations and proof to the Tribal Council.

c.  Vote. After hearing all the charges and proof 

presented by both sides, the Tribal Council shall take a vote on 

whether the accused member shall be removed from office. If a 

majority of the Tribal Council vote to remove the accused council 

member, his or her seat shall be declared vacant. 

Section 2. Recall.

Every person elected to a position on the Tribal Council 

who is an elected officer of the Band shall be subject to recall fr 

such office by the General Council as follows:

a.  Recall Petition. Any voting member of the Band 

may circulate one or more petitions among the eligible voters of th 

Band requesting a special recall election, which petition(s) shall 

contain the name(s) of the person(s) whose recall is sought and shal 

state the charges being preferred against such person(s) in 25 words 

or less. If (one-third) (1/3) of the General Council shall sign the 

petition(s), such petition(s) shall be presented to the (President) 

of the General Council or, if charges are being preferred against 

the (President) Chief, to the Chairperson of the Tribal Council.

b.  Calling the Election. The (President) or if charg 

are being preferred against the (President) the Chairperson 

shall then certify the validity of such signatures of eligible voters 

maintained by the Band. If the required number of valid signatures 

appear on the recall petition, the Tribal Council shall call a specia 

recall election within sixty (60) days from receipt of the petition(s)

c.  Voting. The ballot used for a recall election 

shall contain the question: "Shall” (name of member (s)) be 

recalled from office on the Coyote Valley (Tribal) Council?" The 

ballot shall contain a space opposite such question in which the 

words "Yes - No" shall be printed, so that the voter may indicate 

with a mark whether he or she wishes to vote for or against the 

recall of member(s) so named. In the case of a recall of two 

(2) or more council members, there shall be a separate ballot for 

each member being recalled.

d.  Recall. If a majority of the General Council 

members voting in a special recall election vote to recall the 

council member or any other officer of the Band named in the 

ballot, and provided that (two-thirds) (2/3) of the General Council 

vote in said election, the Tribal Council shall immediately declare 

the council member or officer to be recalled from office and 

his or her seat shall be declared vacant. 

Section 3. Vacancies.

All vacancies effected by this Article shall be filled 

in accordance with Article X of this Document.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - REFERENDUM AND REPEAL 

 
 Section 1. Petition.

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least (one- 

third) (1/3) of the members of the General Council and filed 

with the Secretary of the Tribal Council demanding a referendum 

or a repeal, any proposed or enacted tribal law or any action 

undertaken by the Tribal Council shall be either modified , 

repealed or sustained by the General Council in a general or special 

election to be held within (twenty) (20) days after receipt of th 

petition by the Tribal Secretary. The election shall be called 

by the (President) of the General Council and the vote of a 

majority of the members of the General Council voting in such 

referendum or repeal shall be conclusive and binding on the 

Tribal Council provided that at least (fifty) (50) members of the 

General Council are present and cast their ballots therein.

Section 2. Vote of Confidence.

Any three members of the Tribal Council may request a 

referendum or repeal on any proposal or enacted tribal law or any 

action undertaken by the Tribal Council, by calling a special 

meeting of the General Council within (thirty) (30) days there

after at which time the General Council shall approve or dis

approve, by a majority vote, the tribal law or action in question. 

Section 3. Subsequent Contracts or Agreements.

No referendum or repeal conducted pursuant to the 

provisions of Section 1 above shall serve to abrogate, modify, 

or amend any properly executed contract or agreement approved 

by the Tribal Council and entered into with third parties not 

members of the Band, prior to the enactment of this Document.

Section 1. Initiative.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - INITIATIVE

 
 Any matter of concern to the Band not previously or 

previously considered or acted upon by the Tribal Council may 

be presented to the Tribal Council for action or to the General 

Council, for a vote, provided a petition signed by at least 

twenty percent (20%) of the members of the General Council, 

setting forth the matter to be considered, is filed with the 

Secretary of the Tribal council. The Tribal Council shall consid 

the matter presented in the petition at its next regular or speci 

meeting. If the Tribal Council fails to act upon or disapproves 

the matter within thirty (30) days after filing of a proper 

petition with the Secretary the Tribal Council shall file the peti

tion with the (President) of the General Council who shall place 

it on the agenda and put it to a vote at the next meeting of 

General Council or place it on the ballot for the next general 

election, whichever occurs first. The vote of a majority of the 

members of the General Council voting on the issue shall be con

clusive and binding upon the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV  - JUDICIARY

 
 Section 1. Jurisdiction

The judicial power of the Tribe may be vested in a Tribal 

court or courts, as the Tribal Council may from time to time 

establish, or it may delegate its judicial power to tribal courts 

located outside the reservation (all such courts are hereinafter 

collectively referred to as the “Tribal Courts”). The Tribal Courts 

shall exercise jurisdiction over all cases and controversies within 

the Tribe’s jurisdiction, in law and equity, whether civil or 

criminal in nature, that arise under this Constitution, from the laws 

of the Tribe or which is otherwise inherent to the Tribal Courts’ 

sovereignty to hear such cases or controversies. 

Section 2. Composition

The Tribal Courts may consist of a Chief Judge and any 

number of associate judges.

Section 3. Duties and Procedures

The duties and procedures of the Tribal Courts shall be set 

forth in a Tribal Council resolution adopted pursuant to Tribal law. 

Section 4. Judges

The tenure and compensation of Tribal judges shall be estab

lished by the Tribal Council. No person shall be hired or contracted 

for in the position of Tribal judge unless he or she is more than 

thirty (30) years of age, possesses the qualifications established by 

the Tribal Council and has never been convicted of a felony or, within 

one year preceding his or her appointment, of a misdemeanor.

ARTICLE XV - BILL OF RIGHTS.

Section 1. Individual Rights.

Subject to the limitations imposed by this Document, 

all members of the Band shall enjoy equal political rights and 

opportunities to participate in the tribal government, tribal 

economic resources, tribal assets and all the rights that are 

conferred upon a tribal citizen, and no member shall be denied 

freedom of speech, religion or the right to peacefull assembly, 

nor shall any member be denied the right to petition the Tribal 

Council, General Council or the tribal courts for redress of 

grievances against the Band, or otherwise be deprived of life, 

liberty or property without notice and an opportunity to be 

heard.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - RATIFICATION

 
 This Constitution was adopted by Resolution CV-80-7 and has 

been the governing document of the Tribe since October 4, 1980, with 

or without the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the 

eligible voters of the Tribe in an election called for that purpose by 

the Tribe, pursuant to this Constitution, provided that at least fifty 

percent (50%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election. 

Amendments adopted in this way shall be submitted for approval to the 

Secretary of the Tribal Council. The Secretary of the Tribal Council 

shall call an election on a proposed amendment to the Constitution upon 

receipt of a petition signed by at least one third of the eligible 

voters of the Tribe or upon receipt of a resolution of the Tribal 

Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - NON-IMPAIRMENT OF CONTRACTS

 
 The Tribe shall not, in exercising its powers of self

government, apply any law to any contract to which the Tribe or any 

corporation or instrumentality of the Tribe is a party, which was passed 

through an act of the General Council, Tribal Council or other tribal 

entity by any constitutional means, a subsequently enacted tribal law 

that materially impairs the obligations of such contract, unless the 

passage of such law was a legitimate good faith effort to protect the 

environment, public health or public safety or was necessary to comply 

with applicable federal or state law.

