 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

OF THE

CROW CREEK SIOUX 

TRIBE OF FORT THOMPSON, 

 
  
 SOUTH DAKOTA.

APPROVED APRIL 26, 1949 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1957
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS
OF THE
CROW CREEK SIOUX TRIBE OF FORT 
THOMPSON, SOUTH DAKOTA

 
 Preamble

We, the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe of the Crow Creek Reservation, 
grateful to Almightly God for our freedom, in order to secure its bless
ings, to establish a more perfect tribal organization, to develop better 
school facilities, to conserve and develop our common resources, to es
tablish a credit system and to promote the welfare of ourselves and our 
descendants, hereby ordain and establish this Constitution.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe shall extend to the 
territory within the original confines of the diminished reservation 
boundaries, which are described by the Act of March 2, 1889 (25 Stat. 
L. 888), and including trust allotments without the herein mentioned 
boundaries and such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto un
der any law of the United States, except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll of the Crow Creek Reservation as of July 1, 1948, 
shall be members of the Tribe, Provided, that the Tribal Council shall 
have power to revise said roll, with the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior or his authorized representative, at any time within five 
years from the date of the approval of this Constitution.

Sec. 2. (a) Any child, of one-fourth (1/4) or more Indian blood 
born to any member of the Tribe who at the birth of such child resided 
on the reservation shall be entitled to membership.

(b)  Any child of one-half (l/2) or more Indian blood born to any 
member shall be entitled to membership regardless of his parents’ 
residence.

(c)  Any person of Indian blood who is a descendant of any member 
may be admitted to membership by a majority vote of the Tribal 
Council.

(d)  Applications for membership shall be submitted by the appli
cant or his parent or guardian to a Committee on Membership, which 
shall pass upon them and present them to the Tribal Council for final 
action.

Sec. 3. Vested property rights shall not be acquired or lost 
through membership in this organization except as provided herein.

Article III—The Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe 

shall be the Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall be composed of six members 
elected from the three districts of the Reservation as provided in 
Section 3. Meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held as provided 
in the By-laws.

Sec. 3. The Crow Creek Reservation shall be divided into three 
districts and two members of the Crow Creek Tribal Council shall 
be elected from each of these districts. One member from each dis
trict shall be of one-half or more Indian blood. The three districts 
of the Reservation are designated as follows:
Big Bend:

This district shall consist of all that part of the reservation 
lying west of the Hyde-Hughes County line.

Fort Thompson:

Starting at the Northwest corner of T. 109 N., R. 73 W., thence 
south approximately 4 miles to the Missouri River, thence along 
the east bank of the Missouri River southward to the point where 
the east bank of the Missouri River intersects the section line 
common to Sections 15 and 16, T. 106 N., R. 71 W., (which for 
reference purposes will be called the one quarter corner between 
Sections 15 and 16, T. 106 N., R. 71 W.), thence due north from 
said one quarter corner along the section line to State Highway 
No. 34, which point of intersection would be the N. E. corner of 
Section 16, T. 107 N., R. 71 W., thence east along Highway No. 
34 to the southwest corner of Section 9, T. 107 N., R. 70 W., thence 
north and west, following the reservation boundary to point of 
beginning.
Crow Creek:

This district shall consist of the remainder of the Reservation.
Sec. 4. The Tribal Council shall elect from within its own num
ber a Chairman, Vice-chairman, Treasurer, Sergeant-at-arms, and 
from within or outside of its own number a Secretary and such other 
officers and committees as may be necessary.

At the first election the candidate from each district receiving 
the highest number of votes shall be certified for the two-year term. 
The candidate receiving the next highest number of votes shall be 
certified for the one-year term unless both candidates are of less than 
one-half Indian blood in which case the candidate of one-half or 
more Indian blood receiving the highest number of votes shall be 
certified for the one-year term. Thereafter one member from each 
district shall be elected each year.

After the first election no member of less than one-half Indian 
blood shall be permitted to file as a candidate unless the Council 
member whose term does not expire is of one-half or more Indian 
blood.

Article IV—Nominations and Election

Section 1. The first election of a Tribal Council of six members 
under this Constitution shall be called and supervised by the Tribal 
Council as now constituted, within 30 days after the ratification of 
this Constitution and By-laws, and thereafter election of three 
Councilmen shall be held every year on the third Thursday in April.
Sec. 2. The term of office of each member of the Tribal Council 
shall be two years, except at the first election one member from each 
district shall be elected as provided in Article III, Section 4.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council shall determine rules and regulations 
governing all elections following the State of South Dakota procedure 
as far as practicable.

Sec. 4. A member of the tribe wishing to be a candidate for the 
Tribal Council shall file his name in writing with the Secretary of 
the Tribal Council at least twenty days prior to the third Thursday 
in April. Names of all candidates filed must be posted in the re
spective districts at least fifteen days prior to the third Thursday in 
April. Elections shall be held on the third Thursday in April in a 
central place designated in each district by the Tribal Council. 
Voting shall be by secret ballot. Qualifications of candidates shall 
be those prescribed in Article III, Section 4 and in the By-laws.

Sec. 5. Any resident member of the tribe eighteen years of age 

at the time of election shall be eligible to vote.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal

Section 1. If a Councilman or official shall die, resign, perma
nently leave the reservation, absent himself without just cause from 
at least three consecutive meetings, or be removed from office, the 
Council shall declare the position vacant and appoint a successor to 

fill the unexpired term, provided that the person chosen to fill such 
vacancy shall be qualified.

Sec. 2. A vacancy in any elective office may be filled for the un
expired term at any regular meeting of the Tribal Council. The Tribal 
Council shall investigate complaints of misconduct in office of mem
bers of the Tribal Council or of any of its employees. The Tribal Coun
cil shall have power through resolution, after giving the accused a 
hearing, to remove him from office by the affirmative vote of four mem
bers and proceed to appoint a successor. The member appointed to 
fill a vacancy shall be a resident of the district in which the vacancy 
exists and shall be of the degree of Indian blood necessary to main
tain representation as provided in Article III, section 4 of this Con
stitution.

Article VI—Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council

Section 1. The Council of the Crow Creek Reservation shall ex
ercise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the 
statutes or the Constitution of the United States, and subject further 
to all express restrictions upon such powers contained in this Constitu
tion and the attached by-laws.

(a)  To accept in the name of the tribe gratuities and subsidies and 
to negotiate and receive loans for economic purposes from the 
United States or other lending agencies for the benefit of the 
tribe, individual members of the tribe, or associations or groups 
of members of the tribe.

(b)  To offer tribal income and other tribal property, except land, 
as security for loans obtained by the tribe from the Govern
ment or from other lending agencies.

(c)  To make loans or grants of money, cattle, or other property to 
individual members or associations of members of the tribe 
under regulations and rules approved by it not inconsistent with 
law or regulations, and agreements under which the funds, 
cattle, or property are obtained.

(d)  To negotiate with Federal, State, and local governments on be
half of the tribe and to advise and consult with representatives 
of the Interior Department on all activities of the Department 
that may affect the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe.

(e)  To approve or veto any disposition, lease, or encumberances on 
tribal lands or other tribal assets which may be authorized or 
executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs, or any other officials or agencies of the 
Government.

(f)  To adopt resolutions and ordinances subject to the approval of 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs governing the management 
of all economic affairs and enterprises of the tribe, including 
tribal lands, tribal timber, tribal livestock enterprises, tribal 
community store, or any other tribal activity.

(g)  To appropriate any available applicable tribal funds.
(h)  To enact resolutions or ordinances not inconsistent with Article 
II of this Constitution governing adoption and abandonment 
of membership.

(i)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject to 
the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs governing 
the conduct of members of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, and 
providing for the establishment of a reservation court in defin
ing its duties and powers.

(j)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement of 
the rights of the Crow Creek Tribe and its members, under con
tracts subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

(k)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all ap
propriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Crow Creek Reservation prior to the submission of such esti
mates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(1)  To make assignments of reservation land to members of the 

Crow Creek Sioux Tribe.

(m)  To levy taxes upon members of the Crow Creek Tribe and to 
require the performance of community labor in lieu thereof, 
and to levy taxes or license fees, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs upon non-members doing busi
ness within the Reservation.

(n)  To exclude from the restricted lands of the Crow Creek Res
ervation persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under 
ordinances which shall be subject to the approval of the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs.

(o)  To purchase, under condemnation proceedings in courts of com
petent jurisdiction, land or other property needed for public 
purposes, subject to the approval of the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs.

(p)  To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal 
other than allotted lands, within the territory of the Crow 
Creek Reservation, subject to the approval of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs.

(q)  To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe 

and to enforce school attendance.

(r)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinance or resolution, subject to the 
approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

(s)  To delegate to subordinate boards or to cooperative associations 
which are open to all members of the Tribe any of the foregoing 
powers reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue 
of such delegated power.

(t)  To convene general council meetings for the purpose of se
curing advice on matters of importance affecting the Tribe.
Sec. 2. Future Powers—The Council of the Crow Creek Tribe may 
exercise such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the 
Council by any duly authorized official or agency of government.

Sec. 3. Reserved Powers—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Tribe of the Crow Creek Reservation but not expressly referred 
to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this article, but may 
be exercised by the people of the Crow Creek Reservation through the 
adoption of appropriate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Article VII—Bill of Rights

Section 1. Suffrage—All members of the Tribe over the age of 
eighteen (18) shall have the right to vote in all reservation elections. 
The residence qualifications established by Article IV, Section 5 of 
this Constitution shall apply to all elections.

Sec. 2. Economic Rights—All members of the Tribe shall be ac
corded equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources 
and activities of the reservation.

Sec. 3. Civil Liberties—All members of the Tribe may enjoy with
out hinderance freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, 
and association.

Sec. 4. Rights of Accused—Any member of the Crow Creek Tribe 
accused of any offense shall have the right to a prompt, open, and 
public hearing with due notice of the offense charged, and shall be 
permitted to summon witnesses on his own behalf. Trial by jury 
may be demanded by any prisoner accused of any offense punishable 
by more than thirty (30) days’ imprisonment. Excessive bail shall 
not be required and cruel punishment shall not be imposed.

Article VIII—Referendum

Upon a petition of at least one-half (1/2) of the eligible resident 
voters of the Crow Creek Tribe or upon the request of a majority of 
the Tribal Council, any enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution 

of the Tribal Council shall be submitted to popular referendum and 
the vote of a majority of the resident qualified voters in such ref
erendum shall be conclusive and binding on the Council.

Article IX—Land

Section 1. Allotted Lands—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands, within the Crow Creek Reservation shall continue to be held as 
heretofore by their present owners. It is recognized that under exist
ing law such lands may be condemned for public purposes, such as 
roads, public buildings, or other public improvements, upon payment 
of adequate compensation, by any agency of the State of South Dakota 
or of the Federal Government, or by the Tribe itself. It is further 
recognized that under existing law such lands may be inherited by the 
heirs of the present owner, whether or not they are members of the 
Crow Creek Sioux Tribe. Likewise it is recognized that under exist
ing law the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, may, in his discretion, 
remove restrictions upon such land, upon application by the Indian 
owner, whereupon the land will become subject to State tax and may 
then be mortgaged or sold. The right of the individual Indian to hold 
or to part with his land, as under existing law, shall not be abrogated 
by anything contained in this Constitution, but the owner of re
stricted land may, with the approval of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, voluntarily convey his land to the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe 
either in exchange for a money payment or in exchange for an assign
ment covering the same land or other land. In selling allotted or 
heirship land, owners are urged to give preference to buyers in the 
following order: first, the Tribe; second, a married Indian couple; 
third, a single Indian; fourth, an Indian married to a non-Indian; 
fifth, a non-Indian.

Sec. 2. Tribal Lands—The unallotted lands of the Crow Creek 
Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the 
Crow Creek Sioux Tribe or by the United States in trust for the Crow 
Creek Tribe shall be held as tribal lands, and no part of such land 
shall be mortgaged or sold. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to indi
vidual Indians but may be assigned to members of the Crow Creek 
Sioux Tribe, or leased, or otherwise used by the Tribe.

Sec. 3. Leading of Tribal Lands—Tribal lands may be leased by 
the Tribal Council, with the approval of the Superintendent for such 
periods of time as are permitted by law.

In the leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given, first, to 
Indian cooperative associations and, secondly, to married Indian 
couples who are members of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe; third, to a 
single Indian of the Tribe; fourth, to an enrolled Indian married to 

a non-Indian; fifth, to non-Indians. No lease of tribal land to a non
member shall be made by the Tribal Council unless it shall appear that 
no Indian cooperative association or individual member of the Tribe 
is able and willing to use the land and to pay a reasonable fee for such 
use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the Tribal 
Council with the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, in 
the same manner and upon the same terms as leases.

Sec. 4. Use of Unassigned Tribal Land—Tribal land which is not 
assigned, including tribal timber reserves, shall be managed by the 
Tribal Council in accordance with Article VI, section 1 (f) for the 
benefit of the members of the entire tribe, and any cash income derived 
from such land shall accrue to the benefit of the tribe as a whole.

Sec. 5. Purchase of Land by the Tribe—Available tribal funds 

may be used to acquire land under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within the Crow Creek Reservation which is not now in 
Indian ownership may be purchased by or for the Crow Creek Tribe.
(b)  Restricted land which is in heirship status at the time of the 
adoption and approval of this Constitution, may be purchased by or 
for the Tribe, with the consent of a majority of the adult heirs and the 
legal guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as may 
be agreed upon.

(c)  Land in excess of one hundred and sixty (160) acres owned by 
any member of the Tribe may be purchased by the Tribe, with the con
sent of the owner, payments to be made under such terms as may be 
agreed upon.

(d)  Land owned by any member of the Tribe who has left the reser
vation permanently or who desires to leave the reservation perma
nently may be purchased by the Tribe, under such terms as may be 
agreed upon.

Article X—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be ratified and 
approved in the same manner as this Constitution and By-laws. 
Whenever the Tribal Council by a vote of two-thirds of its members 
shall consider an amendment necessary, such amendment shall be sent 
to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. It shall then be the duty of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs to call an election. If at such election 
the amendment is adopted by a majority vote of the adult resident 
members of the Tribe voting thereon in an election in which at least 
thirty per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote, such amendment 
shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and if ap
proved by him shall thereupon become effective.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE CROW CREEK SIOUX TRIBE
 
 Section 1. Chairman of the Tribal Council—The Chairman of 
the Tribal Council shall preside over all meetings of the Tribal Coun
cil and the General Council, shall perform all duties of the Chairman, 
and exercise any authority delegated to him by the Tribal Council. 
He shall vote only in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman of the Tribal Council—The Vice-Chair
man of the Tribal Council shall assist the Chairman when called 
upon to do so, and in the absence of the chairman, shall preside. 
When so presiding, he shall have all the rights, privileges, and duties, 
as well as the responsibilities, of the Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary of the Tribal Council—The Secretary of the 
Tribal Council shall conduct all tribal correspondence and shall keep 
an accurate record of all matters transacted at meetings of the Tribal 
Council and the General Council. It shall be his duty to submit 
promptly to the Superintendent of the Crow Creek Reservation and 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs copies of all minutes of regular 
and special meetings of the Tribal Council and the General Council. 
When elected from without the membership of the Tribal Council, 
he shall not be entitled to vote.

Sec. 4. Treasurer of the Tribal Council—The Treasurer of the 
Tribal Council shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve, and safe
guard all funds in the custody of the Tribal Council, whether same 
be Tribal Funds or Special Funds, for which the Tribal Council is 
acting as trustee or custodian. He shall deposit all funds in such 
bank Or elsewhere as directed by the Tribal Council, and shall make 
and preserve a faithful record of such funds, and shall report on all 
receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds 
in his possession or custody, such report being made in writing to 
the Council at the regular meetings and at such other times as re
quested by the Council.

It is provided further that the Superintendent may act, under 
proper resolution of the Tribal Council, as agent for the Tribe in 
collecting funds due to the Tribe. Upon making such collections, 
the Superintendent should issue a receipt on the regular office receipt 
form on behalf of the Tribe. Before paying out any money, the 
Superintendent should have an order for payment directed to him 
by the Tribal Treasurer and the Treasurer’s order shall be supported 
by a resolution of the Council empowering him to approve bills for 
payment.

The Treasurer shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds 
in his possession or custody or in possession or custody of the Tribal 

Council except when authorized to do so by resolution duly passed 
by the Tribal Council.

When in the opinion of the Tribal Council or the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs, there are sufficient funds in the custody of the Tribal 
Council to warrant it, the Treasurer shall be required to give a bond 
satisfactory to the Tribal Council and the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least once 
each year by a competent auditor employed by the Tribal Council or 
by a Federal employee approved by the Commissioner of Indian Af
fairs and at such other times as the Tribal Council or the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs shall direct.

All tribal financial records shall be considered public records and 
shall be open for inspection to any member of the Tribe at any reason
able time.

Sec. 5. Sergeant-at-Arms—There shall be a Sergeant-at-Arms, 
appointed by the Chairman, whose duty it shall be to maintain order 
within the Council Chamber and perform such other duties as may be 
designated by the Tribal Council. He shall serve all summons emanat
ing from the Tribal Council, and shall make proper return on the same.
Sec. 6. Appointive Officers—The duties of all appointive boards 
or officers of the community shall be clearly defined by resolutions 
of the Tribal Council at the time of their creation or appointment. 
Such boards and officers shall report, from time to time as required, to 
the Tribal Council and their activities and decisions shall be subject to 
review by the respective Council upon the petition of any person 
aggrieved.

Article II—Duties of Members

It shall be the duty of each member of the Tribal Council to make 
reports to the districts from which he was elected, concerning the pro
ceedings of the Tribal Council.

Article III—Qualifications of Councilmen

In addition to the qualifications prescribed in Article III. Section 4, 
no person shall be a candidate for membership in the Tribal Council 
unless he shall be an enrolled member of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, 
residing on the reservation, in the district of his candidacy, and be of 
voting age.

No person shall be eligible for membership in the Tribal Council 
who has ever been convicted of a felony, or misdemeanor within the 
year preceding the election.

No person shall be a candidate who is a regular Civil Service em

ployee of the Federal Government.

Article IV—Certification of Election

It shall be the, duty of the members of the Tribal Council or board 
appointed by them to certify to the election of the duly elected Tribal 
Council members. This certification shall take place at the time of the 
election.

Article V—Installation of Councilmen

Newly elected members who have been duly certified shall be in
stalled at the first regular meeting of the Council following the elec
tion, upon subscribing to the following oath: “I,------------------------ ,
do hereby solemnly swear (or affirm) that I shall preserve, support, 
and protect the Constitution of the United States and the Constitu
tion and By-laws of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, and execute my 
duties as Councilman to the best of my ability, so help me God.”

Article VI—Salaries

The Tribal Council may prescribe such salaries of officers, boards 
or members of the Tribal Council as it deems advisable, from such 
funds as may be available and applicable.

Article VII—Time and Place of Meetings

Section 1. The regular meetings of the Tribal Council of six mem
bers shall be held once each month at Fort Thompson. The day of 
the month and the opening hour of the meeting shall be left to the 
discretion of the Tribal Council. A quorum of the Tribal Council 
shall consist of four members.

Sec. 2. Meetings of the General Council shall be called by the 
Chairman of the Tribal Council or upon written request of five mem
bers of the Tribal Council or upon a petition signed by at least ten per 
cent of the eligible resident voters of the Tribe. Notice of such meet
ings shall be posted in at least six places at least 10 days before such 
meeting is to take place. The Chairman of the Tribal Council shall 
cause such notices to be posted. Twenty per cent of the eligible voters 
of the Tribe shall constitute a quorum.

Sec. 3. Order of Business—The following order of business is 
established for all the meetings and should be followed as far as 
practicable.

(1)  Call to order by the Chairman
(2)  Invocation by Chaplain or whoever may be designated by

 the Chairman

(3)  Roll Call
(4)  Ascertainment of quorum

(5)  Reading the minutes of the last meeting
(6)  Adoption of the minutes by vote or common consent
(7)  Report of committees
(8)  Unfinished business
(9)  New business
(10)  Adjournment

Sec. 4. Ordinances and Resolutions—All final decisions of the 
Tribal Council on matters of general and permanent interest to the 
members of the Tribe shall be embodied in ordinances. Such ordi
nances shall be collected and published from time to time for the 
information and education of the members of the Tribe.

All final decisions of the Tribal Council on matters of temporary 
interest (such as, action on the reservation budget for a single year, 
or petitions to Congress or to the Secretary of the Interior) or relating 
especially to particular individuals or officials (such as adoption of 
members, instructions for tribal employees or rules of order for the 
Council) shall be embodied in resolutions. Such resolutions shall be 
recorded and filed in such a manner that will facilitate their use for 
public inspection.

All questions of procedure (such as acceptance of committee reports 
or invitations to outsiders to speak) shall be decided by motion duly 
passed or by the ruling of the Chairman, if no objection is heard.

In all ordinances, resolutions, or motions the duly elected council
men may enact by a majority vote, but all matters of importance shall 
be fully discussed and a reasonable attempt shall be made to secure 
unanimous agreement.

Sec. 5. Legislative Forms—Every ordinance shall begin with the 
words: “Be it enacted by the Tribal Council of the Crow Creek Sioux 
Tribe................  . .”

Every ordinance or resolution shall contain a recital of the laws of 
the UNITED STATES and the provisions of the Crow Creek Sioux 
Tribal Constitution under which authority for the said ordinance or 
resolution is found.

Article IX—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws attached hereto shall be in full force 
and effect whenever a majority of the eligible resident voters of the 
Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, voting at an election, called by the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, in which at least thirty percent (30%) 
of the eligible resident voters shall vote, by secret ballot at the desig
nated precincts, shall have ratified this Constitution and By-laws, and 
shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for his ap
proval, and shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION
 
 Pursuant to an order approved December 8, 1948, by the Commis
sioner of Indian Affairs, the attached Constitution and By-laws of the 
Crow Creek Sioux Tribe of the Crow Creek Reservation, Fort Thomp
son, South Dakota, was submitted for ratification to the Indians of 
the Crow Creek Reservation and was on March 11, 1949, duly adopted 
by a vote of 168 for, and 76 against, in an election in which over thirty 
per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots.

Vernon L. Ashley
Chairman, Crow Creek Sioux Tribal Council 
Robert Philbrick.
Secretary, Crow Creek Sioux Tribal Council 

Frell M. Owl
Superintendent, Crow Creek Agency

Tribal Relations

20754-48
6310-49

United States
Department of the Interior
Office of Indian Affairs 
Washington 25, D. C.

Mr. Frell M. Owl. 

Sttpt., Crow Creek Agency

Dear Mr. Owl :

April 26, 1949.

In accordance with Office letter of December 8,1948, the Crow Creek 
Sioux Tribe of South Dakota held an election on March 11, 1949, on 
the matter of the adoption or rejection of a proposed Constitution and 
Bv-laws. The certification indicates that in this election more than a 
majority of those voting cast votes in favor of the Constitution and at 
least 30 per cent of the eligible voters of the tribe participated in the 
election. It is apparent, therefore, that the document was duly ratified 
by the qualified voters of the Tribe.

As required in Article IX of the By-laws, I am hereby approving 
the Constitution and By-laws of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe of Fort 
Thompson, South Dakota, whereupon it becomes effective as the official 
document of the Tribe. I am returning the original to you for safe
keeping. Great care should be exercised in protecting this original 
document.

Sincerely yours,

William Zimmerman, Jr..

Jwist ant Commissioner
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE

CROW CREEK SIOUX 

TRIBE OF FORT THOMPSON 

SOUTH DAKOTA

 
 APPROVED APRIL 26, 1949 
AMENDED JUNE 22, 1961 
AND FEBRUARY 25, 1963

1.  Amendment No. 1 - Effective June 22, 1961.

Article II, Section 2 (c) of the Constitution - repealed.
 
 

AMENDMENTS 

 
 2.  Amendment Nd. 2 - Effective June 22, 1961.

Article IX, Section 5 of the Constitution - amended by 
repealing it and substituting a new section reading 

 as follows:

Section 5. Purchase of Land by the Tribe. The 
Tribal Council shall have the power as author
zied by law. subject to approval by the Secre
tary of the Interior or his authorized representa
tive, to purchase or otherwise acqire lands or
interests in lands, within or without the Reserva
tion.

3.  Amendment No. 3. - Effective June 22, 1961.

Article III of the By-laws - amended by repealing it 
and substituting the following:
Article III - Qualifications of Councilmen
No person shall be eligible for membership on the Tri
bal Council who has satisfied the judgment of con
viction for a felony in any federal, state or tribal 
court of competent jurisdiction within two (2) years 
preceding the date of election.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION
 
 Pursuant to an election held on April 20, 1961, by the Crow 
Creek Sioux Tribe, amendments to the Constitution and By
laws as shown below were submitted for ratification to the 
Indians of the Crow Creek Reservation and was on April 20, 
1961, duly passed as is tabulated below in an election in which 
over thirty per cent (30%) of those entitled to vote cast their 
ballots:
AMENDMENT NO. 1 - Repeal Article II, Section 2 (c) as fol
lows:

(c) Any person of Indian blood who is a descendent 
of any member may be admitted by a majority 
vote of the Tribal Council.

Crow Creek District 
Fort Thompson District 
Big Bend District 

Yes  No
18
40 
45
84 
10 
9
PASSED ___________ 134 
72
 
 

 
 
 
 
 AMENDMENT NO. 2 - Amend Article IX, Section. 5 of the Con
stitution Entitled “Purchase of Land by the Tribe” by Re
pealing it, and substituting a new section reading as follows:

Section 5. Purchase of Land by the Tribe.

The Tribal Council shall have the. power as 
authorized by law, subject to approval by the 
Secretary of the Interior or. his authorized 
representative, to purchase or otherwise ac
quire lands or interests in lands, within or 
without the reservation.

Crow Creek District 
Fort Thompson District 
Big Bend District 

Yes No 
47 
9
36
92 
13 
5
PASSED_____________161 
42

AMENDMENT NO. 3 - Amend the second full paragraph of 
Article III of the By-laws by repealing it and substitute the 
following:

“No person shall be eligible for membership 
on the Tribal Council who has satisfied the 
judgment of conviction for a felony in any 
federal, state or tribal court of competent 
jurisdiction within two (2) years preceding 
the date of election.”

Crow Creek District 
Fort Thompson District 
Big Bend District 

Yes No
34 
24
92 
36
13 
3
63
PASSED ____________ 139 

Total eligible voters: 367

Robert Philbrick, Chairman
Crow Creek Sioux Tribal Council
Abel Bad Moccasin, Secretary
Crow Creek Sioux Tribal Council

Owen D. Morken, Superintendent
Pierre Agency, Pierre, South Dakota 
 
 

UNITED STATES

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 WASHINGTON 25. D. C.

Tribal Programs 
5325-61
June 22, 1961
Through: Area Director, Aberdeen

Mr. Owen D. Morken
Superintendent, Pierre Agency '
Dear Mr. Morken:
 
 

 
 
 In an order issued by the Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
on March 22, 1961, you were authorized to permit the qualified 
voters of the Crow Creek Sioux Reservation in South Dakota 
to express themselves on the adoption or rejection of certain 
amendments to the tribal constitution and bylaws. These a
mendments were presented to the tribal voters in an election 
held on April 20, 1961.
The Aberdeen Area Director, in his letter dated April 28, ad
vised that over 30% of the eligible voters participated in the 
election, and that the amendments were adopted as follows:

Amendment No. 1
Amendment No. 2
Amendment No. 3

134 for
161 for
139 for

72 against
42 against
63 against

Since the Crow Creek tribal members have complied with Arti
cle X of the tribe’s constitution, the amendments to the tribal 
constitution and bylaws are approved as of this date.

Sincerely yours, 
John 0. Crow 
Acting Commissioner 

Enclosure
Transmitted Jun 26, 1961

Robert F. Bennett 
Assistant Area Director

4.  Amendment No. I - Effective February 25, 1963.

Article IX, Section 2 of the Constitution - amended 
to read as follows:

Sec. 2. Tribal Lands - The unallotted lands of the 
Crow Creek Reservation, and all lands which may 
hereafter be acquired by the Crow Creek Sioux 
Tribe or by the United States in trust for the Crow 
Creek Tribe shall be held as tribal lands, and no 
part of such land shall be mortgaged or sold except 
as authorized by law. Tribal lands shall not be al
lotted to individual Indians but may be assigned to 
members of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, or leased, 
or otherwise used by the Tribe.

5.  Amendment No. II - Effective February 25, 1963.

Article VI, Section 1 (b) of the Constitution - amend
ed to read as follows:

(b) To offer tribal income and other tribal proper
ty as security for loans obtained by the Tribe 
from the Government or from other lending a
gencies.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an election held on January 7, 1963 by the Crow 
Creek Sioux Tribe, amendments to the Constitution and By
laws as shown below were submitted for ratification to the In
dians of the Crow Creek Reservation and was on January 7, 
1963 duly passed as is tabulated below in an election in which 
over thirty per cent (30%) of those entitled to vote cast their 
ballots:
AMENDMENT NO. 1. - Amending Article IX, Section 2 of the 
Constitution to read as follows:

Section 2 - The unallotted lands of the Crow Creek 
Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be ac
quired by the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe or by the United 
States in trust for the Crow Creek Tribe shall be held 
as tribal lands, and no part of such land shall be 
mortgaged or sold except as authorized by law. Tribal 
lands shall not be allotted to individual Indians but 
may be assigned to members of the Crow Creek Sioux 
Tribe, or leased, or otherwise used by the Tribe.
Yes No
13
16
0
29

43 
59 
15 
PASSED ______________117 

Crow Creek District 
Fort Thompson District 
Big Bend District 

AMENDMENT NO. 2 - Amending Article VI, Section 1 (b) of 
the Constitution to read as follows:

Section 1 (b) - To offer tribal income and other tribal 
property as security for loans obtained by the Tribe 
from the Government or from other lending agencies.

Crow Creek District 
Fort Thompson District 
Big Bend District 

36 
54 
14 
PASSED—__________ 104 

Yes No
20
21
1
42

REFERENDUM NO 1. - Whether or not an ordinance should 
be adopted to authorize the introduction, possession, trans
portation and sale of liquor on the Crow Creek Siuox Indian 
Reservation subject to tribal control.

Crow Creek District 
Fort Thompson District 
Big Bend District 

Yes No
22
34 
39
37 
9 
6
67
PASSED_____________80 

Total eligible voters: 372 (Three Hundred Seventy-two) 

Robert Philbrick, Chairman 
Crow Creek Sioux Tribal Council 
Wendell Isberg, Secretary 
Crow Creek Sioux Tribal Council

Superintendent Edward Edzards
Pierre Agency, Pierre, South Dakota
 
 

UNITED STATES
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 WASHINGTON 25, D. C.

Tribal Operations 
10196-62 
582-63
Feb. 25, 1963 

Through: Area Director, Aberdeen
Mr. Edward Edzards
Superintendent, Pierre Agency
Dear Mr. Edzards:
In an order issued on November 26, 1962, you were authorized 
to permit the qualified voters of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, 
South Dakota, to express themselves on the adoption or re
jection of two amendments to the tribe’s Constitution and 
Bylaws. These amendments were presented to the tribal voters 
in an election held on January 7, 1963.
The Aberdeen Area Director, in his letter of February 5, ad
vised that over thirty (30) percent of the eligible voters par
ticipated in the election, and that the amendments were a
dopted as follows:

Amendment No. 1 
Amendment No. 2 

117 for 29 against
104 for 42 against

Since the Crow Creek tribal members have complied with 
Article X of the tribe’s Constitution, the amendments to the 
tribe’s Constitution and Bylaws are approved as of this date. 
The original and three copies of Amendments 1 and 2, bear
ing our approval, are returned.

Sincerely yours, 
James E. Officer 
Associate Commissioner

Enclosures
Noted and Transmitted: Mar 1 1963
Martin N. B. Holm
Area Director


AMENDMENT

TO THE 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE
CROW CREEK SIOUX TRIBE
SOUTH DAKOTA

AMENDMENT VI


Article II - MEMBERSHIP, of the Constitution is amended to 
read as follows:

SECTION 1. All persons of Indian blood whose names appear 
on the official roll of the Crow Creek Reservation as of 
October 3, 1962, and all persons enrolled as members bet
ween that date and the effective date of this amendment 
shall be members of the tribe, provided, that the tribal 
council shall have the power to enroll any person who meets 
the qualification listed under Section 2.

SECTION 2.  (a) Any child of one-fourth (1/4) or more
Indian blood, born between October 3, 1962, and the effec
tive date of this amendment to any member who resided on 
the reservation at the time of the child's birth shall be 
entitled to membership.

(b)  Any child of one-half (1/2) or more Indian 

blood born to any member between October 3, 1962, and the 
effective date of this amendment shall be entitled to mem
bership regardless of his parents' residence.

(c)  Any child of one-fourth (1/4) or more Crow 

Creek Sioux Indian blood born to any member of the tribe 
after the effective date of this amendment shall be 
entitled to membership by a majority vote of the tribal 
council.

(d)  Applications for membership shall be sub

mitted by the applicant or his parent or guardian to a 
Committee on Membership, which shall pass upon them and 
present them to the Tribal Council for final action.

SECTION 3. Vested property rights shall not be acquired or 
lost through membership in this organization except as pro
vided herein.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area 

Director, Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian 

Affairs, Aberdeen, South Dakota, on March 6, 1980, 

the attached Amendment A to be renumbered Amendment 

VI, to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Crow Creek 

Sioux Tribe of South Dakota was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the Tribe and was on March 27, 

1930, duly adopted by a vote of 345 for, and 107 

against, in an election in which at least thirty (30) 

percent of the 628 members entitled to vote cast 

their ballot in accordance with Article X of the 

Tribe’s Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

I

APPROVAL

 
 I, Dennis L. Petersen, Acting Area Director of the 

Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 

of the authority granted to the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs by Article X of the constitution and Bylaws of the 

Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, South Dakota, and redelegated to me 

by 10 BIAM 3.1, hereby approve the attached Amendment No. 

VI which amends Article II of the Constitution and Bylaws 

of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe to be effective on the date 

of this approval.

(Sgd) Dennis L. Petersen

Acting Area Director

Date: JUN 23 1980

Aberdeen Area Office
Aberdeen, South Dakota

SECTION 7. The Tribal Council shall adopt an election 
ordinance governing elections under this Constitution. 
Such ordinance shall include, but not be limited to, provi
sions for timely noticing of primary and general elections, 
filing of candidates for tribal office, and a procedure for 
settling election disputes.

Article IV - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS, of the Constitution 
is amended to read as follows:

SECTION 1. The election of all six Councilmembers and the 
Chairman shall be held every two years on the third 
Thursday in April.

SECTION 2. The term of office for the Chairman and each 
member of the Tribal Council shall be for two years, or 
until their successors are duly elected and installed.

SECTION 3. The qualified voters of Big Bend and Crow Creek 
districts each shall elect by secret ballot one (1) coun
cilmember to the Tribal Council. If more than two (2) can
didates seek the office of councilmember from each 
district, a primary election shall be held not more than 
sixty (60) days nor less than twenty (20) days before the 
general election and the two (2) candidates for each office 
of councilmember receiving the highest number of votes in 
the primary election shall be the nominees in the general 
election.

SECTION 4. The qualified voters of Fort Thompson district 
shall elect by secret ballot four (4) councilmembers to the 
Tribal Council. If more than eight (8) candidates seek the 
office of councilmembers, a primary election shall be held 
not more than sixty (60) days nor less than twenty (20) 
days before the general election and the eight (8) can
didates for each office of councilmember receiving the 
highest number of votes in the primary election shall be 
the nominees in the general election.

SECTION 5. The Chairman of the Tribal Council shall be 
elected by the voters of the Tribe at large. If more than 
two (2) candidates seek the office of Chairman, a primary 
election shall be held not more than (60) days nor less 
than twenty (20) days before the general election and the 
two (2) candidates for the office of Chairman receiving the 
highest number of votes in the primary election shall be 
the nominees in the general election.

SECTION 6. Resident enrolled members of the Crow Creek 
Sioux Tribe, eighteen (18) years of age or over who have 
fulfilled the residency requirement of the election 
ordinance, shall be eligible to vote in tribal elections.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area 

Director, Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian 

Affairs, Aberdeen, South Dakota, on March 6, I960, 

the attached Amendment B to be renumbered Amendment 

VII, to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Crow Creek 

Sioux Tribe of South Dakota was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the Tribe and was on March 27, 

1980, duly adopted by a vote of 360 for, and 8l 

against, in an election in which at least thirty (30) 

percent of the 628 members entitled to vote cast 

their ballot in accordance with Article X of the 

Tribe’s constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Dennis L. Petersen, Acting Area Director of the 

Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 

of the authority granted to the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs by Article X of the constitution and Bylaws of the 

Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, South Dakota, and redelegated to me 

by 10 BIAM 3.1, hereby approve the attached Amendment No. 

VII which amends Articles III and IV of the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe to be effective on 

the date of this approval.

(Sgd) Dennis L Petersen

Acting Area Director

Date: JUN 23 1980

Aberdeen Area Office
Aberdeen, South Dakota


AMENDMENT 
TO THE
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
CROW CREEK SIOUX TRIBE 
SOUTH DAKOTA

AMENDMENT VII


Article III - THE GOVERNING BODY, of the Constitution is 
amended to read as follows:

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Crow Creek Sioux 
Tribe shall be the Tribal Council.

SECTION 2. The Tribal Council shall be composed of six (6) 
councilmembers elected from the three (3) districts of the 
Reservation as provided in Section Three (3) plus a chair
man who shall be elected at large within the boundaries of 
the Reservation known as the Crow Creek Sioux Indian 
Reservation.

SECTION 3. The Crow Creek Indian Reservation shall be 
divided into three districts. The Chairman shall be 
elected at large by all districts. One councilmember shall 
be elected from the Big Bend District; one councilmember 
shall be elected from the Crow Creek District; four coun
cilmembers shall be elected from the Fort Thompson 
District. The tribal council chairman and all councilmem
bers shall be members of the Tribe. The three districts of 
the reservation are designated as follows:

BIG BEND:

This district shall consist of all 
that part of the reservation lying 
west of the Hyde-Hughes County line.

FORT THOMPSON:

Starting at the Northwest corner of T. 
109N., R 73W., thence south approxi
mately 4 miles to the Missouri 
River, thence along the east bank of 
the Missouri River southward to the 
point where the east bank of the 
Missouri River intersects the sec
tion line common to Sections 15 and 
16T. 106N., R.71W., (which for 
reference purposes will be called

the one quarter corner between 
Sections 15 and 16, T. 106N., R. 
71W.), thence due north from said 
one quarter corner along the section 
line to State Highway No. 34, which 
point of intersection would be the 
N.E. corner of Section 16, T.
107N., R.71W., thence east along 
Highway No. 34, to the southwest 
corner of Section 9, T. 107N., R. 
70W., thence north and west, 
following the reservation boundary 
to point of beginning.

CROW CREEK: 

This district shall consist of the
remainder of the reservation.

SECTION 4. The Tribal Council shall elect from within its 
own number a Vice-Chairman, Treasurer, and from within or 
outside its own number a Secretary and such other officers 
and committees as may be necessary.

SECTION 5. All councilmembers shall have a voting strength 
in the Tribal Council which reflects the share of the popu
lation he represents according to the most recent official 
census.

SECTION 6. Where there is more than one councilman elected 
from a district, the vote of each councilman shall be com
puted as follows: By dividing the number of councilmen 
into the number of votes which the district is entitled 
according to Section 7 below. No councilman shall vote 
absentee or delegate his vote to another proxy.

SECTION 7. The proportionate share of each district shall 
be determined by dividing the number of tribal members in 
the district into the total number of tribal members on the 
reservation according to the latest census.

SECTION 8. The Tribal Council members in office on the 
effective date of this Amendment shall remain in office and 
shall be entitled to exercise all powers granted by this 
Constitution to the Tribal Council until such time as their 
successors are duly elected and installed pursuant to this 
Constitution.


AMENDMENT 
TO THE 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
CROW CREEK SIOUX TRIBE 
SOUTH DAKOTA

AMENDMENT VIII


Article V - VACANCIES, REMOVAL AND RECALL, of the Constitu
tion is amended as follows:

SECTION 1. If a councilmember shall die, resign, per
manently leave the reservation, absent himself without just 
cause from at least three consecutive regular or special 
meetings, or be removed from office, the Council shall 
declare the position vacant and appoint a successor to fill 
the unexpired term. The vacancy may be filled at any regu
lar meeting of the Tribal Council, provided the person 
appointed shall be a resident of the district in which the 
vacancy exists and meets all the requirements for a 
councilmember. If a councilmember moves out of the 
district he represents, he shall automatically forfeit his 
office.

SECTION 2. If the office of Chairman becomes vacant before 
the expiration of the term and if less than one (1) year of 
the term remains, the Vice-Chairman shall fill the unex
pired term unless the Tribal Council in its discretion 
orders a special election, or, if one year or more of the 
term remains, the Tribal Council shall order a special 
election to be held within thirty (30) days after the date 
of the vacancy.

SECTION 3. Procedures for the recall of a member of the 
Tribal Council may be initiated by the filing with the 
Tribal Council of a petition setting forth specific charges 
against the official bearing the signatures of no less than 
30% of the qualified voters voting in the last general 
election from the official's district or the reservation at 
large in the case of the Chairman. Upon receipt of such 
petition the Tribal Council shall, within five (5) days, 
notify the official of the charges against him and provide 
him no less than ten (10) days to respond to such charges 
in writing. The Tribal Council, no less than five (5) days 
after receipt of the accused official's reply to the 
charges, shall call an election on the recall petition in 

the official's district or the reservation at large as 
appropriate. The election notice shall set forth the 
charges and the official's reply to them and shall be 
posted in the Tribal Office and in each district at least 
thirty (30) days before the election.

If the official is recalled from office in the election, 
the vacancy shall be filled under Sections 1 or 2 of this 
Article. An official shall not be subjected to more than 
one recall election during each term of office. Any offi
cial removed by recall shall not be appointed to tribal 
office for employment in a supervisory capacity or position 
of trust for the remainder of the term of office from which 
he was removed.

For all purposes herein, the tribal chairperson is con
sidered a member of the tribal council.

SECTION 4. If the Chairman or a Councilmember is convicted 
of a felony during his term of office, he shall automati
cally forfeit his office.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area 

Director, Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian 

Affairs, Aberdeen, South Dakota, on March 6, 1980, 

the attached Amendment C to be renumbered Amendment 

VIII, to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Crow 

Creek Sioux Tribe of South Dakota was submitted to 

the qualified voters of the Tribe and was on March 

27, 1980, duly adopted by a vote of 382 for, and 67 

against, in an election in which at least thirty (30) 

percent of the 628 members entitled to vote cast 

their ballot in accordance with Article X of the 

Tribe’s Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Dennis L. Petersen, Acting Area Director of the 

Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 

of the authority granted to the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs by Article X of the constitution and Bylaws of the 

Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, South Dakota, and redelegated to me 

by 10 BIAM 3.1, hereby approve the attached Amendment No. 

VIII which amends Article V of the Constitution and Bylaws 

of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe to be effective on the date 

of this approval.

(Sgd) Dennis L. Petersen
Acting Area Director

Date: JUN 23 1980

Aberdeen Area Office
Aberdeen, South Dakota


AMENDMENT 
TO THE
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE
CROW CREEK SIOUX TRIBE 
SOUTH DAKOTA

AMENDMENT IX


Article III - THE GOVERNING BODY, of the Constitution is 
amended to read as follows:

SECTION 9. No person shall be a candidate for chairman 
unless he shall have resided on the reservation for one 
year immediately preceding the election, and be at least 18 
years of age or older. No person shall be eligible for the 
position of Chairman who has satisfied the judgment of con
viction for a felony in a federal, state or tribal court of 
competent jurisdiction within two (2) years preceding the 
date of election.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area 

Director, Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian 

Affairs, Aberdeen, South Dakota, on March 6, 1980, 

the attached Amendment D to be renumbered Amendment 

IX, to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Crow Creek 

Sioux Tribe of South Dakota was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the Tribe and was on March 27, 

1980, duly adopted by a vote of 382 for, and 75 

against, in an election in which at least thirty (30) 

percent of the 628 members entitled to vote cast 

their ballot in accordance with Article X of the 

Tribe’s Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Dennis L. Petersen, Acting Area Director of the 

Aberdeen Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 

of the authority granted to the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs by Article X of the constitution and Bylaws of the 

Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, South Dakota, and redelegated to me 

by 10 BIAM 3.1, hereby approve the attached Amendment No. 

IX which amends Article III of the Constitution and Bylaws 

of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe to be effective on the date 

of this approval.

(Sgd) Dennis L. Petersen

Acting Area Director

Date: JUN 23 1980

Aberdeen Area Office 
Aberdeen, South Dakota


AMENDMENT 
TO THE 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

OF THE
CROW CREEK SIOUX TRIBE
SOUTH DAKOTA

AMENDMENT X


 
  
 Article V shall be amended as follows: 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES, REMOVAL AND RECALL

 
 SECTION 1. If a Councilmember shall die, resign, permanently 
leave the reservation, absent himself without just cause from at 
Least three consecutive regular or special meetings, or be removed 
from office, the Council shall declare the position vacant and 
appoint a successor to fill the unexpired term. The vacancy may 
be filled at any regular meeting of the Tribal Council, provided 
the person appointed shall be a resident of the district in which 
the vacancy exists and meets all the requirements for a council
member, If a councilmember moves out of the district he repre
sents, he shall automatically forfeit his office,

SEC. 2. If the office of Chairman becomes vacant before the 

expiraton of the term and if less than one (1) year of the term 
remains, the Vice-Chairman shall fill the unexpired term unless the 
Tribal Council in its discretion orders a special election, or, if 
one year or more of the term remains, the Tribal Council shall 
order a special election to be held within thirty (30) days after 
the date of the vacancy.

SEC. 3. Procedures for the recall of a member of the Tribal 
Council may be initiated by the filing with the Tribal Council of 
a petition setting forth specific charges as enumerated in 
Section 5 against the official bearing the signatures of no less 
than 51% of the qualified voters voting in the last general elec
tion, from the official's district or the reservation at large in 
the case of the Chairman or vice-Chairman. Upon receipt of such 
petition the Tribal Council shall, within five (5) days, notify 
the official of the charges against him and provide him no less 
than ten (10} days to respond to such charges in writing. The 
Tribal Council, no less than five {5} days after receipt of the 
accused official’s reply to the charges, shall conduct a hearing 
on the recall petition in the official's district, or the reser
vation at large as appropriate. If the charges so warrant, the 
Tribal Council shall then give notice of election. The election 
notice shall get forth the charges and the official's reply to 
them and. shall be posted in the tribal office and in each district 
at Least thirty (30) days before the election.
 
 

 
 
 If the official is recalled from office in the election, the 

vacancy shall be filled under Sections 1 or 2 of this Article. An 
official shall be not be subjected to more than one recall elec
tion during each term of office. Any official removed by recall 
shall not be appointed to tribal office for employment in a super
visory capacity or position of trust for the remainder of the term 
of office from which he was removed.

For all purposes herein, the Tribal Chairman and Vice-Chairman 

is considered a member of the Tribal council.

SEC. 4. If the Chairman or a Councilmember is convicted of a 

felony during his term of office, he shall automatically forfeit 
his office.

SEC. 5. Code of Ethics for all elected or selected officials 
of the Crow Creek Sioux Tribe. Gross neglect and improper conduct 
of Article V - Vacancies, Removal and Recall from office shall be 
interpreted by the Tribal Council in accordance with these 
definitions.

A. GROSS NEGLECT - As evidenced through any or all of the 

following:

1.  Gross incompetency: Unable or unwilling to perform the 

duties of the office.

2.  Failure to assign through payroll deduction any debt owed 

to the tribe.

3.  Choosing not to act on legitimate business such as peti

tions on a timely basis by tabling action; in effect the people 
are put down by such action,

4.  Abandonment of Office: Not attending three consecutive 

regular meetings or. moving out of the area of district elected 
from.

B,  IMPROPER CONDUCT - Determined by Tribal council.

1.  Misuse of office: Unauthorised personal use of tribal 

equipment, manpower or materials.

2.  Public conduct so as to question the integrity of the 
Crow Creek Sioux Tribe, Conduct such as public intoxication as 
observed by the public; or convictions by legal courts.

3.  Converting tribal property or monies without authoriza

 tion through omission of misrepresentation of facts.

4.  Malfeasance of offices Including, gross partiality or 

oppression.

C.  IMPROPER CONDUCT - Convictions by Crow Creek Sioux Tribal 

Court.

1.  If the Chairman or a councilmember is convicted of a 

felony during his term of office, he shall automatically forfeit 
his office.

2.  Three misdemeanor convictions within a twenty-four (24) 

month period.

3.  Crimes in office: Corruption, extortion, fraudulent 

claims for compensation such as salary# mileage and per diem 
during an unexcused absence or an unaccountable period of time.

4.  Contempt of court.
5.  Any misdemeanor, including but not limited to malicious 

mischief, statutory rape, hit and run, assault, battery or 
assault and battery.

6.  Driving while under the influence of alcohol twice in a 

twenty-four (24) month period.

I, Jerry L. Jaeger, Area Director of the Aberdeen Area Office, 
Bureau of Indian Affaire, by virtue of the authority granted to me 
by 10 BIAM 3.1, do hereby approve the attached Amendment XI to 
Article II, to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Crow Creek Sioux 
Tribe.

(Sgd) Jerry L. Jaeger
Area Director

Aberdeen Area Office 
Aberdeen, South Dakota

Date: FEB 04 1986

