 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
OF THE
DELAWARE TRIBE OF WESTERN OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 Invoking the guidance of Almighty God, we the Delaware Tribe of 
Western Oklahoma, with faith in the purposes of our Supreme Being, 
with pride in our ancient heritage and with the determination to 
promote, through our united effort, the general well-being of our 
tribe and to secure unto our tribe and tribal descendants the rights, 
powers and privileges provided by the laws of the United States of 
America, adopt the following constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Delaware Tribe of Western 
Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE II - PURPOSE

 
 The purpose of the tribal organization shall be, through united effort, 
to promote the economic, moral, cultural, educational, and health 
status of the Delaware Tribe; to seek and insure assistance of the 
United States of America; the State of Oklahoma in carrying out mutual 
programs to accomplish these purposes in concert and to in no way inter
fere with or otherwise influence any individual member.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma 
shall consist of the following persons; provided they have not 
received land or money by virtue of having been enrolled as members 
of another Indian tribe:

(a)  Those persons who prior to the ratification of this constitution 
and bylaws were recognized as members or were entitled to member
ship in accordance with the provisions of the Membership 
Resolution effective July 30, 1957, and subsequently amended 
December 6, 1969, which includes:

(1)  All living persons of Delaware Indian blood 

whose names appear or were entitled to appear 
on the official census roll of January 1, 1940;
 
 

 
 
 (2)  All giving persons of Delaware Indian blood 
born between January 1, 1940, and July 30, 
1957;

(3)  All living persons born after July 30, 1957,

who are one-eighth (1/8) or more Delaware 
Indian blood and one of whose parents is a 
member of the Delaware Tribe of Indians of 
Western Oklahoma.

(b)  All persons born on or after the effective date of this consti
tution and bylaws, both of whose natural parents are members of 
the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

(c)  All living persons born after the effective date of this consti
tution and bylaws who file applications for enrollment and who 
are one-eighth (1/8) degree or more Delaware Indian blood and 
one of whose natural parents is a member of the Delaware Tribe 
of Western Oklahoma and who are admitted to membership by a 
majority vote of the tribal members in general council.

Sec. 2. Degree of Indian blood shall be computed from the approved 
January 1, 1940, census roll as corrected.

Sec. 3. Any person who applies for membership who otherwise qualifies 
for membership but who has been enrolled as a member of another Indian 
tribe may be enrolled as a member of the Delaware Tribe of Western 
Oklahoma; provided he has not shared in land or money as a member of 
another tribe; and provided further that he relinquishes in writing 
his membership in the other Indian tribe and; provided further, that 
such applicant is admitted to membership by a majority vote of the 
tribal members in general council.

Sec. 4. The executive committee shall appoint a membership committee 
composed of tribal members who are not members of the executive 
committee which shall have the responsibility of preparing and 
maintaining the current membership roll consistent with the provi
sions of this Article.

Sec. 5. The tribe may at any time correct the official census roll 
dated January 1, 1940, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
on February 3, 1969, such corrections subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative. 

/

Sec. 6. The executive committee shall have power to take necessary 
actions subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior, cover
ing future membership.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 The membership of the general council of the Delaware Tribe of 
Western Oklahoma shall consist of all members of the tribe eighteen 
(18) years of age and older.
 
 

ARTICLE V - EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

 
 Section 1. Composition. The officers of the tribe shall be a president, 
vice-president, secretary, treasurer, and two committeemen who together 
shall comprise the executive committee.

Sec. 2. Term of office for each officer shall be four (4) years and 
until a successor is duly elected and seated. No person shall serve 
more than two (2) consecutive terms in a particular position on the 
executive committee.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS

 
 The executive committee shall have full authority to act on behalf of 
the tribe in all matters upon which the tribe is empowered to act now 
or in the future. Such powers may be exercised subject to any restric
tions contained in the United States Constitution or any Federal or 
State statutes.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election. All terms of office for the executive 
committee members, incumbent at the time this constitution and bylaws 
becomes effective, shall expire at the June 1973 annual meeting. At 
the election held in conjunction with that meeting, a system of 
staggered terms of office shall be establishes as follows:

A president and treasurer shall be elected for four (4) year 
terms; a vice-president shall be elected for three (3) years; 
the terms for a secretary and one (1) committeeman shall expire 
after two (2) years; and the remaining committeeman shall serve 
a one (1) year team. In each case, those elected as stated 
above shall serve the specified term or until their successors 
are duly elected/anX seated. Thereafter, there shall be annual 
elections in June and all terms shall be four (4) years in length.

Sec. 2. Regular elections to fill vacancies as terms expire on the 
executive committee, shall be held at the regular annual meeting of 
the general council in June. Persons elected to office shall serve 
four (4) year terms unless earlier removed or recalled and until their 
successors are duly elected and seated.
 
 

 
 
 Sec. 3. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, including the 
first one under this constitution, shall be conducted in accordance 
with an election ordinance, consistent with this constitution and 
bylaws, which shall be enacted by the executive committee. Such 
ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, absentee voting, voter 
registration, nomination of candidates in advance of election date, 
an impartial election committee selected from outside the executive 
committee that shall be responsible for conducting all tribal elections 
and a procedure for resolving election disputes. Further, it shall 
require that no write-in votes be accepted in any tribal election. 
Provisions shall also be included regarding the conduct of recall and 
referendum elections and a uniform procedure for submitting petitions.

Sec. 4. Voter Qualifications. Any member of the tribe shall be 
qualified to vote, provided he is at least eighteen (18) years of age 
on the date of the election and he has duly registered.

Sec. 5. Qualifications of Candidates. Any member of the tribe, who 
will be at least twenty-one (21) years of age on the date of the elec
tion shall qualify as a candidate for membership on the executive 
committee, or subordinate body by election or appointment, except 
those persons previously convicted in any court of competent jurisdic
tion of a felony, or any member who is delinquently indebted to the 
tribe.

Sec. 6. Filling of Vacancies. Any vacancy which occurs in the member
ship of the executive committee shall be filled for the unexpired term 
at the next duly called meeting of the general council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Annual meetings of the general council shall be held on the 
third Saturday in June for the purpose of electing tribal leaders, re
ceiving reports and transacting any other business which may come 
regularly before the council. Should the executive committee determine 
that it is not possible or appropriate to hold such meetings on the
specified date, it shall then be held within thirty (30) days follow
ing, on a date to be determined by the executive committee; provided, 
that at least ten (10) days' notice shall be given of such meeting.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the general council may be called at the 
discretion of the president, and shall be called by him upon his receipt 
of a written request signed by twenty-five (25) members of the council, 
or upon written request of at least three (3) officers of the tribe. 
Should the president refuse to call such meetings for the date and time 
requested, any three (3) tribal officers shall be empowered to do so.

Sec. 3. Notice of Special General Council Meeting. The principal 
object of a special general council meeting must be stated in the 
notification and may include the words "and for the transaction of 
other business that may be presented." Unless these words are added, 
no business may be transacted except for the object stated in the 
notice.

Sec. 4. All meetings of executive committee may be called by the 
president at his discretion and shall be called by him for the date 
and time requested upon the written request of any three (3) members 
of the executive committee. Should he refuse to call the requested 
meeting, any three (3) members of the executive committee shall be 
empowered to do so.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - VACANCIES

 
 Failure to attend three (3) consecutive duly called executive committee 
meetings, unless excused by a majority of the executive committee, 
shall automatically result in loss of office for the individual concerned.

The resulting vacancy, or a vacancy created by death, resignation, re
call or removal, shall be filled for the unexpired term in accordance 
with the provisions of Article VII, Section 6, of this constitution and 
bylaws. 

.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT 

 
 ’

Petitions for recall referendum and initiative must comply with procedures 
set forth in the election ordinance as stated in Article VII, Section 3, 
of this constitution.

Section 1. Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 
forty (40) of the tribe's registered voters it shall be the duty of 
the president to call and conduct within fifteen (15) days, a special 
meeting of the general council to consider the recall of a member of 
the executive committee. Such meeting is subject to quorum provisions. 
Only one (1) member of the committee shall be considered for recall at 
any given recall meeting. Once an individual is subjected to recall 
proceedings, he shall not again be considered for such action until at 
least six (6) months have passed.

Sec. 2. Referendum and Initiative. Upon receipt of a petition signed 
by at least forty (40) of the tribe’s registered voters, it shall be 
the duty of the president to call and conduct within fifteen (15) days, 
a special meeting of the general council for the purpose of presenting 
to the voters for their determination any issue or question. The 
decision of the majority of those voting shall be binding on the 
executive committee, provided a quorum is present.
 
 

I

ARTICLE XI - REMOVAL

 
 The executive committee shall enact an ordinance providing for the 
removal of members of that body. Included shall be procedures for 
the accused to confront his accusers and speak on his behalf in
answer to a written statement of charges at a special executive 
committee meeting, called for that purpose. The accused shall be 
provided with such written charges at least fifteen (15) days in
advance of the removal meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the tribe shall enjoy without hindrance, 
freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and associa
tion.

Sec. 2. This constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or 
otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of the 
tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the Untied States. 

Sec. 3. The individual property rights of any member of the tribe 
shall not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions 
of this constitution and bylaws without the consent of such individual 
members.

Sec. 4. The enumeration of any rights in this Article shall not be 
interpreted to limit the rights otherwise guaranteed by the Indian 
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (25 USCA 1302).
 
 

 ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS 

 
 Amendments to this constitution and bylaws may be proposed by a majority 
vote of the executive committee or by a petition signed by at least 
forty (40) registered voters of the tribe. If approved by the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs, the amendment shall be submitted to the qualified 
voters of the tribe and shall be effective when ratified by a majority 
of those voting in an election called by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs. A petition for such purpose must comply with 25 CFR 53.
 
 

BYLAWS

ARTICLE XIV - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The president shall preside at all meetings of the general 
council and of the executive committee. He shall have general super
vision of the affairs of the general council and of the executive 
committee and shall perform all duties associated with the office of 
president.

Sec. 2. The vice-president in the absence of the president shall 
perform the duties of that office. He shall serve as ex-officio 
member of all committees created by the executive committee and 
shall represent the president at outside meetings or at other 
occasions when called upon to do so.

Sec. 3. The secretary shall keep an accurate account of all pro
ceedings and official records of the council and of the executive 
committee, and shall file copies with the Superintendent of the 
Anadarko Agency. He shall be responsible for the prompt and 
efficient handling of all correspondence pertaining to the business 
of the council and executive committee. All official records of the 
secretary shall be open at reasonable times to the inspection of 
council members in the presence of the secretary. The secretary 
shall keep an accurate list of all general council members, and in 
the absence of the president and vice-president, shall preside at 
meetings of the general council or executive committee.

Sec. 4. The treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in possession 
of the tribe from any source. He shall keep an accurate record of all 
funds and shall make disbursements in accordance with a properly 
executed resolution of the executive committee. The treasurer shall 
keep all tribal monies entrusted to his care in special bank accounts. At 
any time that such an account shall amount to fifty dollars ($50) or 
more, he shall file a bond satisfactory to the executive committee 
and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond shall 
be paid out of tribal money. The accounts and records of the treasurer 
shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by council members 
in the presence of the treasurer. The books of the treasurer shall 
be subject to audit or inspection at the discretion of the executive 
committee or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

s-
u

Sec. 5. The committeemen shall perform those specific duties which 
shall be set forth in a resolution of the executive committee.

Sec. 6. Transfer of Records. At the expiration of their term of 
office, all officers shall turn over all tribal records and funds in 
their possession to their successors.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - CONDUCT OF MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Place. All regular and special meetings of the general 
council and the executive committee shall be held at the Anadarko 
Agency unless otherwise designated in the notice of such meeting.

Sec. 2. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's 
Rules of Order, unless otherwise specified in this constitution and 
bylaws.

Sec. 3. Quorum. Twenty (20) members of the general council shall 
constitute a quorum. No business, other than the election of 
officers to provide for continuity of government, shall be trans
acted by the general council, unless a quorum is present. Four (4) 
members of the executive committee shall constitute a quorum to 
transact any business.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws shall be effective when approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority of those adult 
members of the tribe who cast ballots in an election authorized by 
the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, W. L. Rogers, Deputy Assistant Secretary of 

the Interior do hereby approve the foregoing Constitution and

Bylaws of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

Approval Recommended:

(Sgd) Raymond V. Butler

Acting Director of Community Services

W. L Rogers.
(sgd.) 

Deputy Assistant
Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C.

Date: FEB 1 3 1973
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order of February 13, 1973 , by the Deputy Assistant

Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and Bylaws of the

Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma was submitted for ratification to

the eligible voters of the Delaware Tribe and was on Apri1 21, 1973,

duly ratified by a vote of 119 for, and 7 against,

in an election duly called for that purpose.
 
 

RESOLUTION

 
 WHEREAS, the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western Oklahoma have been 
denied by the Secretary of the Interior the right to organize and avail 
Itself of the provisions of the Oklahoma Welfare Act of June 1936, 
and

WHEREAS, the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western Oklahoma has and 
desires to continue to maintain its identity, customs and language, and

WHEREAS, the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western Oklahoma desires to 
form an Executive Committee to carry on We business functions and 
affairs of the Tribe between meetings of the General Council.

BE IT RESOLVED, that there is hereby established an Executive Committee 
of the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western Oklahoma to be composed of 
six (6) adult members of this tribe, and

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that there be delegated to said Executive Com
mittee full authority to act between meetings of the General on behalf 
of the tribe in all matters upon which the General Council is empowered 
to act and any authority exercised under the authority of this resolution 
shall not reqire concurrence or ratification of the General Council, 
and four (4) members of the Executive Committee shall constitute a 
quorum for the transacting of tribal business, and

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that members of said Executive Committee shall 
be elected by the General Council on the first Saturday in the month of
January of each year and such committeemen shall serve for a term of one 
year or until their successors are elected. Committeemen shall be elected 
at the annual meeting of the General Council for that purpose under such 
rules and regulations as the General Council has adopted for that 
particular meeting, and

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the members of said Executive Committee
be empowered to elect from within their membership a President, Vice 
President, Secretary and/or a Treasurer, who shall hold offices until 
the succeeding annual election meeting, and

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that any member of the tribe 21 years of age
and over may vote in any annual election, and that twenty (20) voting 
members shall constitute a quorum at any annual election or other 
General Council meeting.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 I, Henry Chisholm, President of the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western Oklahoma certify that the above 

resolution was passed at a General Council meeting held at Anadarko, Oklahoma, on the 5 day of July, 1958, at 
which meeting there were 22 voting members present who voted 22 for and 0 against the resolution.

(Sgd) Henry Chisholm

The foregoing resolution which was passed on July 5, 1958, by the

General Council of the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western Oklahoma 
is hereby given official recognition as the governing document of the Tribe.

(Sgd) Fred H. Massey 
Acting Deputy Commissioner

Washington, D. C., August 19, 1958
 
  
  
 

I

 
 United States Department of the Interior 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20242

IN REPLY REFER TO:
Tribal Operations

Through: Area Director, Anadarko, Oklahoma 73005 July 29, 1969

Mr. Arthur L. Thomas

President, Delaware Executive Committee

Dear Mr. Thomas:

Thank you for sending us copies of Resolution No. 7-68 adopted by 
the General Council of the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western 
Oklahoma on January 20, 1968.

Resolution No. 7-68 amends the tribe's election procedures by 
changing the date of tribal elections from the first Saturday in 
January to the first Saturday in June, commencing in 1969. The 
resolution also amends the terms of office of the executive committee 
officers. We agree with the Delaware Tribe's decision to stagger 
the terms of officers to provide continuity in the conduct of tribal 
business.

The Delaware Tribe's governing document does not require formal 
approval by this office. However, Resolution No. 7-68, duly 
adopted January 20, 1968, and effective as of that date, by the 
General Council of the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western 
Oklahoma is hereby given official recognition as Amendment No. I 
to the tribe's governing document. Copies of this letter and of 
Resolution No. 7-68 should be made a permanent part of the tribe's 
organizational document.

Sincerely,

(Sgd.) Charles B. Rovin

Acting Assistant Commissioner
 
 

RESOLUTION

 
 DELAWARE RESOLUTION NO. 7-68

WHEREAS: The Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma is organized and has governing rules and 

regulations approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and

WHEREAS: The Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma, after much discussion pertaining to the 
election date of the first Saturday in the month of January of each year as pre
scribed in the original resolution approved August 19, 1958, which is silent on 
amendment provisions, under which the tribe functions, desires to change the dat 
and,

WHEREAS: The Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma also desires to change the term of office 

for the election officers so that some will remain in office and there will not 
be a complete change each year for the proper handling of tribal affairs.

NOW BE IT RESOLVED, That the date of next election be the first Saturday in June, 1969, 

with the officers now elected, remaining in office until next election date, 
being the first Saturday in June, 1969,

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, THAT the election date will be the first Saturday of June of each 

year thereafter,

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, THAT the terms of the officers will be as follows: President, 

Secretary and One Councilman (to be designated at the June, 1969 election) 
will be elected for a term of two (2) years and the Vice-President, Treasurer 
and One Councilman will be elected for a term of one (1) year. The new terms 
of office will begin with the June, 1969 election date. Thereafter, all terms of 
office shall be for a period of two years or until a successor is duly elected.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 I, Jack McLane, Jr., President of the Delaware Tribe of Indians of Western Oklahoma, cer
tify that the above resolution was passed at a General Council Meeting held in the Anadarko 
Area Office Conference Room, Anadarko, Oklahoma, on the 20th day of January, 1968, at which 
meeting there were 27 voting members present who voted 27 for and 0 against the above said 
resolution amending election rules and regulations.

1-20-68 DATE

Adopted this 20th. day of January, 1968, by the Delaware Tribe of Western 
Oklahoma by a vote of 27 for and 0 against, there being 27 tribal members 
present.
 
  
 

 
AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

 
 of the 
 
DELAWARE TRIBE OF WESTERN OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT I


 
 Article III of the Constitution shall be amended in its entirety which 
shall read as follows: 
 

 ARTICLE III MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE


Section 1. The membership of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma shall 
consist of the following persons; provided they have not received land or 
money by virtue of having been enrolled as a member of another Indian 
tribe:

(a)  Those persons who prior to the ratification of this amendment 

qualified for membership under previous membership requirements.

(b)  All persons of Delaware Indian blood who received an allotment 
of land pursuant to the provisions of the Act of March 2, 1895, 
(82 Stat. 876), shall be included as full blood members of the 
tribe.

(c) All living lineal descendants of individuals eligible for 
 membership under the provisions of Section 1 (b) and Section 2 

of the Article, who possess at least one-eighth (1/8) degree 
Delaware Indian blood and one of whose natural parents is a 
member of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

(d)  All persons born on or after the effective date of this Consti

tution and Bylaws, both of whose natural parents are members of 
the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma regardless of degree of 
Delaware Indian blood.

 Section 2. All persons identified in Section 1 (b) of this Article shall 
be considered as possessing 4/4ths degree Delaware Indian blood for the 
purpose of computing eligibility of their descendants for membership under 
Section 1 (c) or 1 (d) of this Article. Brothers and sisters of Delaware 
Indian blood of all persons identified in Section 1 (b) shall likewise 
be considered as possessing 4/4ths degree Delaware Indian blood.

 Section 3. Any person who applies for membership who otherwise qualifies 
for membership but who has been enrolled as a member of another Indian

 tribe may be enrolled as a member of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma; 
provided he has not shared in land or money as a member of another tribe;
 
 

 
 
 
 and provided further that he relinquishes in writing his membership in 
the other Indian tribe and; provided further, that such applicant is 
admitted to membership by a majority vote of the tribal members in general 
council.

Section 4. The executive committee shall appoint a membership committee 
composed of tribal members who are not members of the executive committee 
which shall have the responsibility of preparing and maintaining the 
current membership roll consistent with the provisions of this Article.

Section 5. The executive committee shall have the power to prescribe 
rules and regulations covering future membership, including adoptions 
and the loss of membership, subject to the approval of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs or his authorized representative.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Charles W. James, Area Director do hereby approve the fore

going Amendment I to the Constitution and By-Laws of the Delaware 

Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

Approval Recommended:

(Sgd) Charles V. Delaney

Acting Director,
Divis ion of Indian Services

Anadarko, Oklahoma

Date: DEC 24 1975

 (SGD) CHARLES W. JAMES

 Area Director 
 
 

 
  
CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order of Charles W. James, Area Director, the 

attached Amendment I to the Constitution and By-Laws of the 

Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma was submitted for ratifica

tion to the eligible voters of the Delaware Tribe and was on

and 12 against, in an election duly called for that 

, duly ratified by a vote of 92 for,
3-6-76

purpose.
 
  
 

AMENDMENT 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 Of the  
 
DELAWARE TRIBE OF WESTERN OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT IX


Sections 1 and 2 of Article VII of the Constitution and Bylaws of 
the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma shall be amended in their 
entirety to read as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Bi-annual Elections. Elections shall be held every 
two years with members being selected to fill three positions on 
the executive committee at each election. These bi-annual elections 
shall become effective in 1977. In order to effectively implement 
this procedure, the term of the executive committee member which 
is scheduled to expire in 1978 shall expire in 1977, and the term 
of the Vice President which is scheduled to expire in 1980 shall 
expire in 1979. All other terms of office of members of the execu
tive committee incumbent at the time this amendment becomes effective 
shall remain unchanged.

Section 2. Date of Elections. Regular elections to fill vacancies 
as terms expire on the executive committee shall be held bi-annually, 
in odd-numbered years, at the regular annual meeting of the general 
council on the third Saturday in June. Persons elected to office 
shall serve four (4) years.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1, Article VIII - Meetings, shall be amended to read as 
follows:

Section 1. Annual meetings of the general council shall be held on 
the third Saturday in June for the purpose of receiving reports and 
transacting any other business which may come regularly before the 
council. Bi-annually in odd-numbered years an election to fill 
vacancies on the executive committee shall take piece as part of 
the annual meeting. Should the executive committee determine that 
it is not possible or appropriate to hold such meetings on the specified 
date, it shall then be held within thirty (30) days following, on a 
data to ba determined by the executive committee; provided, that at 
least ten (10) days’ notice shall be given on such meeting.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Charles W. James, Area Director, do hereby approve the fore

going Amendment II to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Delaware

Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

Approval Recommended:

(Sgd) Charles V. Delaney

Director, 
Division of Indian Services

Anadarko, Oklahoma

Date: 

MAY 7 1976

(SGD) CHARLES W. JAMES

Area Director 
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order of Charles W. James, Area Director, the

attached Amendment II to the Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma was submitted for ratifica

tion to the eligible voters of the Delaware Tribe and was on

6-19-76 duly ratified by a vote of 92 for,

and 5 against, in an election duly called for that purpose.
 
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
DELAWARE TRIBE GF WESTERN OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT III


Section 3, Article XIV - Duties of Officers, shall be amended to 
read as follows:

Section 3. The Secretary shall keep an accurate account of all pro
ceedings and official records of the council and of the executive 
Committee, and shall file copies in the tribal office. He shall be 
responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all correspondence 
pertaining to the business of the council and executive committee.
All official records of the secretary shall be open at reasonable 
times to the inspection of council members in the presence of the 
secretary. The secretary shall keep an accurate list of all general 
council members, and in the absence of the president and vice- 
president, shall preside at meetings of the general council or 
executive committee.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Charles W. James, Area Director, do hereby approve the fore

going Amendment III to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Delaware 

Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

Approval Recommended:

(Sgd) Charles V. Delaney
Director, 
Division of Indian Services 

Anadarko, Oklahoma

Date: MAY 7 1976

(SGD) CHARLES W. JAMES

Area Director
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order of Charles W. James, Area Director, the

attached Amendment III to the Constitution and Bylaws of the

Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma was submitted for ratification 

to the eligible voters of the Delaware Tribe and was on 6-19-76

duly ratified by a vote of 92 for, and 4 against, in an 

election duly called for that purpose.

MAY 28 1981

Area Director, Anadarko Area Office 
Branch of Tribal Government Services

Proposed Constitutional Amendments, Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

Superintendent, Anadarko Agency

The Executive Committee of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma has 
requested, by Resolution 81-37, adopted May 22, 1981, the approval of 
two proposed amendments to the tribe's constitution and bylaws.

Amendment IV

Resolution 81-37 proposes that Section 1(b), (c) and (d), Article III - 
Membership of Tribe, which now reads:

(b)  All persons of Delaware Indian blood who received an 

allotment of land pursuant to the provisions of the Act 
of March 2, 1895, (82 Stat. 876), shall be included as 
full blood members of the tribe.

(c)  All living lineal descendants of individuals eligible 

for membership under the provisions of Section 1(b) and 
Section 2 of the Article, who possess at least one
eighth (1/8) degree Delaware Indian blood and one of 
whose natural parents is a member of the Delaware Tribe 
of Western Oklahoma.

(d)  All persons bom on or after the effective date of this 

Constitution and Bylaws, both of whose natural parents 
are members of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma 
regardless of degree of Delaware Indian blood.

shall be amended to read as follows:

(b)  All persons of Absentee Delaware Indian blood, who received 
an allotment of land, under the present jurisdiction of the 
Anadarko Area Office, shall be included as full-blood 
members of the tribe.

(c)  All living lineal descendants of individuals eligible for 

membership under the provisions of Section 1(b) and Section 2 
of Article III who possess at least one-eighth (1/8) degree 
Absentee Delaware Indian blood.

(d)  All persons born on or after the effective date of this 

amendment, both of whose natural parents are members of 
the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma regardless of degree 
of Absentee Delaware Indian blood.

and the addition of a new subsection (e), as follows:

(e) The Delaware Indian blood for all members of the Delaware 
Tribe of Western Oklahoma shall be shown on the membership roll 
as Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma Indian blood.

Section 2, Article III, of the Constitution and Bylaws, which now reads:

Section 2. All persons identified in Section 1(b) of this 
Article shall be considered as possessing 4/4ths degree Delaware 
Indian blood for the purpose of computing eligibility of their 
descendants for membership under Section 1 (c) or 1 (d) of this 
Article. Brothers and sisters of Delaware Indian blood of all 
persons identified in Section 1 (b) shall likewise be considered 
as possessing 4/4ths degree Delaware Indian blood.

shall be amended to read as follows:

Section 2. All persons identified in Section 1 (b) of Article III 
shall be considered as possessing 4/4ths degree Absentee Delaware 
Indian blood for the purpose of computing eligibility of their 
descendants for membership under Section 1 (c) or 1 (d) of this 
Article. Brothers and sisters of Absentee Delaware Indian blood 
of all persons identified in Section 1 (b) shall likewise be con
sidered as possessing 4/4ths degree Absentee Delaware Indian blood.

Amendment V

Resolution 81-37 proposes that Section 4, Article XIV - Duties of Officers, 
which now reads:

Section 4. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds 1n 
possession of the tribe from any source. He shall keep an accurate 
record of all funds and shall make disbursements in accordance 
with a properly executed resolution of the executive committee. 
The treasurer shall keep all tribal monies entrusted to his care 
in special bank accounts. At any time that such an account shall 
amount to fifty dollars ($50) or more, he shall file a bond satis
factory to the executive committee and the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of tribal money. 
The accounts and records of the treasurer shall be open at reason
able times for inspection by council members in the presence of 
the treasurer. The books of the treasurer shall be subject to 
audit or inspection at the discretion of the executive committee 
or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

shall be amended to read as follows:

Section 4. The treasurer shall keep account of all funds in 
possession of the tribe from any source. He shall keep an accurate 
record of all funds and shall make disbursements in accordance 
with a properly executed resolution of the executive committee.

Section 4 (continued)

The Treasurer shall keep all tribal monies entrusted to his 
care 1n special bank accounts and/or in "Individual Indian 
Money" Accounts. At any time that such an account shall 
amount to fifty dollars ($50) or more, he shall file a bond 
satisfactory to the executive committee and the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of 
tribal money. The accounts and records of the treasurer shall 
be open at a reasonable time for inspection by council members 
in the presence of the treasurer. The books of the treasurer 
shall be kept in the tribal office and be subject to audit or 
inspection at the discretion of the executive committee or the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs.

Pursuant to authority delegated to the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs 
by Secretarial Order No. 3010, 42 F.R. 53682 and redelegated to the Area 
Director by 10 BIAM 3.1, 40 F.R. 17046, I am approving Amendments IV and V. 
You are authorized to call an election whereby the eligible tribal voters 
may ratify or reject these proposed amendments, which shall become effective 
if ratified by a majority of those voting. If ratified, the amendments 
shall be identified as Amendment IV and V respectively. If only one amend
ment is ratified, it shall be identified as Amendment IV.

The manner of voting shall be conducted 1n accordance with regulations esta
blished by you in conjunction with representatives of the Delaware Tribal 
Executive Committee. Although the election is not within the provisions 
of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act, regulations provided for those elections 
might furnish acceptable guidelines, insofar as notification and balloting 
are concerned.

Provide our office with the results of the election inrnediately upon its 
certification.
 
 

STANLEY 
SPEAKS

 
 cc: Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Attn: Division of Tribal Government Services, Code 440
 
 

 CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order of Stanley Speaks, Area Director, the attached 

Amendment IV to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Delaware Tribe of 

Western Oklahoma was submitted for ratification to the eligible voters 

of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma and was on August 15, 1981 

duly ratified by a vote of 37 for, and 4 against, in an

election duly called for that purpose.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order of Stanley Speaks, Area Director, the attachment 

Amendment V to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Delaware Tribe of 

Western Oklahoma was submitted for ratification to the eligible voters 

of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma and was on August 15, 1981 

duly ratified by a vote of 37 for, and 4 against, in an election

duly called for that purpose.

81-37
 
 

DELAWARE TRIBE OF WESTERN OKLAHOMA

RESOLUTION

 
 WHEREAS, the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma operates in accordance 

with the Constitution and By-Laws adopted by the tribe and 
recognized by the Secretary of the Interior, and

WHEREAS, the Constitution empowers the Executive Committee full authority 

to transact all business in behalf of the tribe, and

WHEREAS, tribal members have expressed their desire to Amend the Delaware 
Tribal Constitution and By-Laws, Article III, Section 1 (b), (c), 
(d), and new Subsection (e), and Article XIV, Section 4, and

WHEREAS, Article III, Section 1 (b) provides that all persons of Delaware 

Indian blood, who received an allotment of land pursuant to the 
provision of the Act of March 2, 1895, (82 Stat.876) shall be 
included as Full Blood Delaware, and

WHEREAS, Article III, Section 1 (c) provides that all living lineal descen
dants of individuals eligible for membership under the provisions 
of Section 1 (b) and Section 2 of the Article, who possess at 
least l/8th degree of Delaware Indian Blood and one of whose 
natural parents is a member of the Delaware Tribe of Western Okla
homa, and

WHEREAS, Article III, Section 1 (d) provides that "All persons born on or 

after the effective date of this Constitution and By-Laws, both 
of whose natural parents are members of the Delaware Tribe of 
Western Oklahoma regardless of degree of Delaware Indian Blood,” 
and

WHEREAS, Article XIV, Section 4, provides that the Treasurer shall keen

81-37
 
 

DELAWARE TRIBE OF WESTERN OKLAHOMA

RESOLUTION

 
 WHEREAS, the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma operates in accordance 

with the Constitution and By-Laws adopted by the tribe and 
recognized by the Secretary of the Interior, and

WHEREAS, the Constitution empowers the Executive Committee full authority 

to transact all business in behalf of the tribe, and

WHEREAS, tribal members have expressed their desire to Amend the Delaware 
Tribal Constitution and By-Laws, Article III, Section 1 (b) , (c), 
(d), and new Subsection (e), and Article XIV, Section 4, and

WHEREAS, Article III, Section 1 (b) provides that all persons of Delaware 

Indian blood, who received an allotment of land pursuant to the 
provision of the Act of March 2, 1895, (82 Stat.876) shall be 
included as Full Blood Delaware, and

WHEREAS, Article III, Section 1 (c) provides that all living lineal descen
dants of individuals eligible for membership under the provisions 
of Section 1 (b) and Section 2 of the Article, who possess at 
least l/8th degree of Delaware Indian Blood and one of whose 
natural parents is a member of the Delaware Tribe of Western Okla
homa , and

WHEREAS, Article III, Section 1 (d) provides that "All persons born on or 

after the effective date of this Constitution and By-Laws, both 
of whose natural parents are members of the Delaware Tribe of 
Western Oklahoma regardless of degree of Delaware Indian Blood," 
and

WHEREAS, Article XIV, Section 4, provides that the Treasurer shall keep 

all tribal monies entrusted to his care in a Special Bank Account; 
and that the Treasurer shall keep all the accounts, records, and 
books of all tribal monies, and

WHEREAS, the Proposed Amendments to the Constitution and By-Laws are attached 

and provide Article III, Section 1 (b) that all persons of Absentee 
Delaware Blood who received an allotment of lands under the juris
diction of the Anadarko Area Office, shall be Full Blood Members 
of the tribe and Article III, Section 1 (c) eliminates the require
ment of one (1) natural parent as a member of the Delaware Tribe, 
and

WHEREAS, Proposed Amendment, Article III, Section 1 (d) provides that "all 

persons born on or after the effective date of the Constitution 
both of whose natural parents are members of the Delaware Tribe of 
Western Oklahoma", and

WHEREAS, a New Subsection (e), shall be added to Article III which provides 

that the Delaware Indian Blood shall be shown on the membership 
roll as Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma blood, and

WHEREAS, Article III, Section 2 of the Constitution and By-Laws shall be 
Amended accordingly, to provide that the words "Delaware Indian 
Blood: shall hereafter be changed to read "Absentee Delaware Indian 
Blood" in order to be consistent with the working in Section 1, 
Article III, and

WHEREAS, Article XIV, as Amended, will allow the Treasurer to keep tribal 

monies in a Special Bank Account or Individual Indian Money Account 
and the books and records of the Treasurer shall be kept in the 
Tribal Office, and

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that this Resolution replace the Resolution, 
#81-25, adopted by the Delaware Executive Committee on April 18, 
1981, and

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED, that the Proposed Amendments, included in this 

Resolution, be approved by the Bureau of Indian Affairs and 
that the Superintendent of the Anadarko Agency be authorized 
to conduct a referendum election whereby the eligible voters 
may ratify or reject each of the Two Proposed Amendments to 
the Constitution and By-Laws of the Delaware Tribe of Western 
Oklahoma.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 The foregoing Resolution was adopted by the Delaware Executive Committee 
on May 22, 1981, in Anadarko, Oklahoma, by a vote of 4 
for and 0 against, a quorum being present.

ATTEST:

APPROVED:

Dona K. Thompson, Secretary

Lawrence Snake, President

