 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
of The Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma 
 

ARTICLE I-NAME

 
 The name of the organization shall be the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

ARTICLE Il-PURPOSE

The purpose of the tribal organization shall be, through united effort, to promote the economic, moral, 
cultural, educational, and health status of the Delaware Tribe; to seek and insure assistance of the 
United States of America; the State of Oklahoma in carrying out mutual progams to accomplish these 
purposes in concert and to in no way interfere with or otherwise influence any individual member.

ARTICLE Ill-MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE

(Pursuant to Amendment I, effective March 6,1976) Section 1. The membership of the Delaware Tribe 
of Western Oklahoma shall consist of the following persons; provided they have not received land or 
money by virtue of having been enrolled as a member of another Indian tribe:

(a) Those persons who prior to the ratification of this amendment qualified for membership under 
previous membership requirements.

(b) All persons of Delaware Indian blood who received an allotment of land pursuant to the provisions 
of the Act of March 2,1895, (82 Stat. 876), shall be included as full blood members of the tribe.

(c) All living lineal descendants of individuals eligible for membership under the provisions of Section 
1(b) and Section 2 of the Article, who possess at least one-eighth (1/8) degree Delaware Indian blood 
and one of whose natural parents is a member of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma.

(d) All persons born on or after the effective date of this Constitution and Bylaws, both of whose 
natural parents are members of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma regardless of degree of 
Delaware Indian blood.

Section 2. All persons identified in Section 1(b) of this Article shall be considered as possessing 4/4ths 
degree Delaware Indian blood for the purpose of computing eligibility of their descendants for 
member-ship under Section 1(c) or 1(d) of this Article. Brothers and sisters of Delaware Indian blood 
of all persons identified in Section 1(b) shall likewise be considered as possessing 4/4ths degree 
Delaware Indian blood.

Section 3. Any person who applies for membership who otherwise qualifies for membership but who 
has been enrolled as a member of another Indian tribe may be enrolled as a member of the Delaware 
Tribe of Western Oklahoma; provided he has not shared in land or money as a member of another 
tribe; and provided further that he relinquishes in writing his membership in the other Indian tribe and; 
provided further, that such applicant is admitted to membership by a majority vote of the tribal 
members in general council.

Section 4. The executive committee shall appoint a membership committee composed of tribal 
members who are not members of the executive committee which shall have the responsibility of 
preparing and maintaining the current membership roll consistent with the pro-visions of this Article.

Section 5. The executive committee shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations covering 
future membership, including adoptions and the loss of membership, subject to the approval of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his authorized representative.
 
 

ARTICLE IV-GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 The membership of the general council of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma shall consist of all 
members of the tribe eighteen (18) years of age or older.
 
 

ARTICLE V-EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

 
 Secton 1. Composition. The officers of the tribe shall be a president, vice-president, secretary, 
treasurer, and two committeemen who together shall comprise the executive committee. Sec. 2. Term 
of office for each officer shall be four (4) years and until a successor is duly elected and seated. No 
person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms in a particular position on the executive 
committee.

ARTICLE VI-POWERS*

The executive committee shall have full authority to act on behalf of the tribe in all matters upon which 
the tribe is empowered to act now or in the future. Such powers may be exercised subject to any 
restric-tions contained in the United States Constitution or any Federal or State Statues.
 
 

ARTICLE VII-ELECTIONS

 
 (Pursuant to Amendment II, effective June 19,1976) Section 1. Bi-annual Elections. Elections shall be 
held every two years with members being selected to fill three positions on the executive committee at 
each election. These bi-annual elections shall become effective in 1977. In order to effectively 
implement this procedure, the term of the executive committee member which is scheduled to expire 
in 1978 shall expire in 1977, and the term of the Vice President which is scheduled to expire in 1980 
shall expire in 1979. All other terms of office of members of the executive committee incumbent at the 
time this amendment becomes effective shall remain unchanged.

Sec. 2. Date of Elections. Regular elections to fill vacancies as terms expire on the executive 
committee shall be held bi-annually, in odd-numbered years, at the regular annual meeting of the 
general council on the third Saturday in June. Persons elected to office shall serve four (4) years.

Sec. 3. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, including the first one under this constitution, shall be 
conducted in accordance with an election ordinance, consistent with this constitution and bylaws, 
which shall be enacted by the executive committee. Such ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, 
absentee voting, voter registration, nomi-nation of candidates in advance of election date, an impartial 
election committee selected from outside the executive committee that shall be responsible for 
conducting all tribal elections and a procedure for resolving election disputes. Further, it shall require 
that no write-in votes be accepted in any tribal election. Provisions included regarding the conduct of

recall and referendum elections and a uniform procedure for submitting petitions.

Sec. 4. Voter Qualifications. Any member of the tribe shall be qualified to vote, provided he is at least 
eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the election and he has duly registered.

Sec. 5. Qualifications of Candidates. Any member of the tribe, who will be at least twenty-one (21) 
years of age on the date of the election shall qualify as a candidate for membership on the executive 
committee, or subordinate body by election or appointment, except those persons previously 
convicted in any court of competent jurisdiction of a felony, or any member who is delinquently 
indebted to the tribe.

Sec. 6. Filling of Vacancies. Any vacancy which occurs in the membership of the executive committee 
shall be filled for the unexpired term at the next duly called meeting of the general council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII-MEETINGS

 
 (Pursuant to Amendment Ill, effective June 19,1976) Section 1. Annual meetings of the general council 
shall be held on the third Saturday in June for the purpose of receiving reports and transacting any 
other business which may come regularly before the council. Bi-annually in odd-numbered years an 
election to fill vacancies on the executive committee shall take place as part of the annual meeting. 
Should the executive committee determine that it is not possible or appropriate to hold such meetings 
on the specified date, it shall then be held within thirty (30) days following, on a date to be determined 
by the executive committee; provided, that at least ten (10) days' notice shall be given on such 
meeting.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the general council may be called at the discretion of the president, and 
shall be called by him upon his receipt of a written request signed by twenty-five (25) members of the 
council, or upon written request of at least three (3) officers of the tribe. Should the president refuse to 
call such meetings for the date and time requested, any three (3) tribal officers shall be empowered to 
do so.

Sec. 3. Notice of Special General Council Meeting. The principal object of the special general council 
meeting must be stated in the notification and may include the words 'and for the transaction of other 
business that may be presented." Unless these words are added, no business may be transacted 
except for the object stated in the notice.

Sec. 4. All meetings of the executive committee may be called by the president at his discretion and 
shall be called by him for the date and time requested upon the written request of any three (3) 
members of the executive committee. Should he refuse to call the requested meeting, any three (3) 
members of the executive committee shall be empowered to do so.
 
 

ARTICLE IX-VACANCIES

 
 Failure to attend three (3) consecutive duly called executive committee meetings, unless excused by 
a majority of the executive committee, shall automatically result in loss of office for the individual 
concerned.

The resulting vacancy, or a vacancy created by death, resignation, recall or removal, shall be filled for 
the unexpired term in accordance with the provisions of Article VII, Section 6, of this constitution and 
bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE X-POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

 
 Petitions for recall referendum and initiative must comply with procedures set forth in the election 
ordinance as stated in Article VII, Section 3, of this constitution.

Section 1. Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least forty (40) of the tribe's registered voters 
it shall be the duty of the president to call and conduct within fifteen (15) days, a special meeting of the 
general council to consider the recall of a member of the executive committee. Such meeting is 
subject to quorum provisions. Only one (1) member of the committee shall be considered for recall at 
any given recall meeting. Once an individual is subjected to recall proceedings, he shall not again be 
considered for such action until at least six (6) months have passed.

Sec. 2. Referendum and Initiative. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least forty (40) of the tribe's 
registered voters, it shall be the duty of the president to call and conduct within fifteen (15) days, a 
special meeting of the general council for the purpose of presenting to the voters for their 
determination any issue or question. The decision of the majority of those voting shall be binding on 
the executive committee, provided a quorum is present.
 
 

ARTICLE XI-REMOVAL

 
 The executive committee shall enact an ordinance providing for the removal of members of that body. 
Included shall be procedures for the accused to confront his accusers and speak on his behalf in 
answer to a written statement of charges at a special executive committee meeting called for that 
purpose. The accused shall be provided with such written charges at least fifteen (15) days in advance 
of the removal meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XII-BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the tribe shall enjoy without hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, 
speech, press, assembly and association.

Section 2. This constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize the rights and 
privileges of the members of the tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the United States.

Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the tribe shall not be altered, abridged or 
otherwise affected by the provisions of this constitution and bylaws without the consent of such 
individual members.

Section 4. The enumeration of any rights in this Article shall not be interpreted to limit the rights 
otherwise guaranteed by the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (25 USCA 1302).
 
 

ARTICLE XIII-AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this constitution and bylaws may be proposed by a majority vote of the executive 

committee or by a petition signed by at least forty (40) registered voters of the tribe. If approved by the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the amendment shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe 
and shall be effective when ratified by a majority of those voting in an election called by the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. A petition for such purpose must comply with 25 CFR 53.
 
 

BYLAWS

ARTICLE XIV-DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 (Pursuant to Amendment III, effective June 19,1976)

Section 1. The president shall preside at all meetings of the general council and of the executive 
committee. He shall have general supervision of the affairs of the general council and of the executive 
committee and shall perform all duties associated with the office of president.

Section 2. The vice-president in the absence of the president shall perform the duties of that office. He 
shall serve as ex-officio member of all committees created by the executive committee and shall 
repre-sent the president at outside meetings or at other occasions when called upon to do so.

Section 3. The secretary shall keep an accurate account of all proceedings and official records of the 
council and of the executive committee, and shall file copies in the tribal office. He shall be responsible 
for the prompt and efficient handling of all correspondence pertaining to the business of the council 
and executive committee. All official records of the secretary shall be open at reasonable times to the 
inspection of council members in the presence of the secretary. The secretary shall keep an accurate 
list of all general council members, and in the absence of the president and vice-president, shall 
preside at meetings of the general council or executive committee.

Section 4. The treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in possession of the tribe from any source. 
He shall keep an accurate record of all funds and shall make disbursements in accordance with a 
properly executed resolution of the executive committee. The treasurer shall keep all tribal monies 
entrusted to his care in special bank accounts. At any time that such an account shall amount to fifty 
dollars ($50) or more, he shall file a bond satisfactory to the executive committee and the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of tribal money. The accounts 
and records of the treasurer shall be open at reasonable times for inspection by council members in 
the presence of the treasurer. The books of the treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection at the 
discretion of the executive committee or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Section 5. The committeemen shall perform those specific duties which shall be set forth in a 
resolution of the executive committee.

Section 6. Transfer of Records. At the expiration of their term of office, all officers shall turn over all 
tribal records and funds in their possession to their successors.
 
 

ARTICLE XV-CONDUCT OF MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Place. All regular and special meetings of the general council and the executive committee 
shall be held at the Anadarko Agency* unless otherwise designated in the notice of such meeting.

Section 2. All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, unless 
otherwise specified in this constitution and bylaws.

Section 3. Quorum. Twenty (20) members of the general council 

shall constitute a quorum. No business, other than the election of officers to provide for continuity of 
government, shall be transacted by the general council, unless a quorum is present. Four (4) 
members of the executive committee shall constitute a quorum to transact any busi-ness.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI-ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws shall be effective when approved by the Secretary of the Interior and 
ratified by a majority of those adult members of the tribe who cast ballots in an election authorized by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

*Section 1 was amended August 16,1986 to read "meetings shall be held at the Delaware Tribal 
complex."

Ratified April 21, 1973

