 
  
 Delaware Nation  
 
CONSTITUTION

 
 Of the Delaware Nation
Constitution 

(As ratified April 21, 1973, amended March 6, 1976, June 19, 1976, August 15, 1981, August 16, 1986,
November 13, 1999, April 22, 2000, and March 16, 2019)

Preamble

(Pursuant to Amendment IX, adopted November 13, 1999)

We, the Delaware Nation, whose aboriginal name is Lenape or Lenni-Lenape also 
known as the Grandfathers, is the oldest known Nation in the Northern Hemisphere, 
aboriginally inhabiting the Eastern Seaboard of North America, the first indigenous Nation to 
treaty with the United States of America (September 17, 1778, 7 Statute 13: Brotherton 
Reservation) , consummating a total of one (1) treaty with the United States of America and 
descending from the Cape Girardeau Spanish Land Grant Area, invoking the guidance of the 
Almighty Creator with faith in the purposes of our Supreme Being, with pride in our ancient 
heritage and with the determination to promote, through our united effort, the general well
being of our Nation and to secure unto our Nation and Nation' s descendants the rights, 
powers and privileges provided by the laws of the Delaware Nation and the laws of the United 
States of America, hereby adopt the following Constitution.

Article I - Name

(Pursuant to Amendment VIII, adopted November 13, 1999)

The name of this organization shall be the Delaware Nation.

Article II - Purpose
The purpose of this organization shall be, through united effort, to promote the economic, 
moral, cultural, educational and health status of the Delaware Nation; to seek and insure 
assistance of the United States of America; the State of Oklahoma in carrying out mutual 
programs to accomplish these purposes in concert and to in no way interfere with or 
otherwise influence any individual member.

Article III - Citizenship of Tribe

(Pursuant to Amendment I, adopted March 6, 1976, Amendment IV, adopted August 15, 1981,
Amendment X, adopted November 13, 1999, and Amendments XII & XIII, adopted March 16, 2019)

Section 1.
The citizenship of the Delaware Nation shall consist of the following persons; provided they 
have not received land or money by virtue of having been enrolled as a citizen of another 
Indian tribe:

(a)  Those persons who prior to the ratification of this amendment qualified for 

citizenship under previous citizenship requirements.

(b)  All persons of Absentee Delaware Indian blood, who received an allotment of land 
under the present jurisdiction of the Anadarko Area Office, shall be included as full
blood citizens of the tribe.

(c)  All living lineal descendants of individuals eligible for citizenship under the 

provisions of Section 1 (b) and Section 2 of Article III.

(d)  All persons born on or after the effective date of this amendment, both of whose 
natural parents are citizens of the Delaware Nation regardless of degree of 
Absentee Delaware Indian blood.

(e)  The Delaware Indian blood for all members of the Delaware Nation shall be shown 

on the citizenship roll as Delaware Nation Indian blood.

Section 2.

All persons identified in Section 1 (b) of this Article shall be considered as possessing 4/4ths 
degree Delaware Indian blood for the purpose of computing eligibility of their descendants 
for citizenship under Section 1 (c) or 1 (d) of this Article. Brothers and sisters of the Absentee 
Delaware Indian blood of all persons identified in Section I (b) shall likewise be considered 
as possessing 4/4ths degree Absentee Delaware Indian-blood.

Section 3.

Any person who applies for citizenship who otherwise qualifies for citizenship but who has 
been enrolled as a member of another Indian tribe may be enrolled as a citizen of the 
Delaware Nation; provided he has not shared in land or money as a member of another tribe; 
and provided further that he relinquishes in writing his membership in the other Indian tribe 
and; provided further, that such applicant is admitted to citizenship by a majority vote of the 
tribal citizens in general council.

Section 4.

The executive committee shall appoint a citizenship committee composed of tribal citizens 
who are not members of the executive committee which shall have the responsibility of 
preparing and maintaining the current citizenship roll consistent with the provisions of this 
Article.

Section 5.

The executive committee shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations covering 
future citizenship, including adoptions and the loss of citizenship.

Article IV  - General Council
The membership of the general council of the Delaware Nation shall consist of all citizens 
of the tribe eighteen (18) years of age and older.

Article V - Executive Committee

Section 1. Composition.

The officers of the tribe shall be a president, vice-president, secretary, treasurer, and two 
committeemen who together shall comprise the executive committee.

Section 2. Term of Office.

Term of office for each officer shall be four (4) years and until a successor is duly 
elected and seated. No person shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms in a 
particular position on the executive committee.

Article VI  - Powers
(Pursuant to Amendment VI, adopted August 16, 1986 Amendment XI, adopted April 22, 2000, and 
Amendment XIII, adopted March 16, 2019)

Section 1.

The Delaware Executive Committee shall have specific authority to act on the following 
matters:

(a)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances and codes governing law and order to 
protect the peace, health, safety and general welfare of Delaware tribal citizens on 
tribally owned land.

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees.

(c)  To promulgate and enforce zoning ordinances, building codes, and other related 
codes and ordinances necessary for the orderly development of tribal enterprises 
located on tribally owned land.

(d)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances to provide for general revenue and the 
levying of taxes for public purposes of the Delaware Nation, provided such 
ordinances are limited to taxing business enterprises, lessees, and others 
engaged in economic development activities with the Tribe on tribally owned land. 
This authority specifically prohibits the Executive Committee from levying taxes on 
property or business enterprises owned by individual tribal members.

(e)  To negotiate with Federal, State or local governments and enter into, perform and 

enforce contracts, grants, joint ventures and other agreements.

(f)  To establish subordinate organizations for economic or social welfare purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations or to any subordinate boards, committees, 
or officials of the Tribe, specific powers of the Delaware Executive Committee, 
reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.

Section 2.

Subject to the limitations contained in Section 1 above, the Delaware Executive Committee 
shall have full authority to act on behalf of the Nation in all other matters upon which the 
Nation is empowered to act now or in the future as presented to and approved by majority 
vote by members at duly called or scheduled General Council meetings. These powers shall 
be exercised subject to any applicable restrictions contained in the United States 
Constitution or any Federal statute.

Article VII  - Elections
(Pursuant to Amendment Il, adopted June 19, 1976)

Section 1. Bi-Annual Elections.

Elections shall be held every two years with citizens being selected to fill three positions on 
the executive committee at each election. These bi-annual elections shall become effective 
in 1977. In order to effectively implement this procedure, the term of the executive committee 
member which is scheduled to expire in 1978 shall expire in 1977, and the term of the Vice 
President which is scheduled to expire in 1980 shall expire in 1979. All other terms of office 
of members of the executive committee incumbent at the time this amendment becomes 
effective shall remain unchanged.

Section 2. Date of Elections.

Regular elections to fill vacancies as terms expire on the executive committee shall be held 
bi-annually, in odd-numbered years, at the regular annual meeting of the general council on 
the third Saturday in June. Persons elected to office shall serve four (4) years.

Section 3. Election Ordinance.

All tribal elections, including the first one under this constitution, shall be conducted in 
accordance with an election ordinance, consistent with this constitution and by-laws which 
shall be enacted by the executive committee. Such ordinance shall provide for secret 
balloting, absentee voting, voter registration, nomination of candidates in advance of 
election date, and impartial election committee selected from outside the executive 
committee that shall be responsible for conducting all tribal elections and a procedure for 
resolving election disputes. Further, it shall require that no write-in votes be accepted in any 
tribal election. Provisions shall also be included regarding the conduct of recall and 
referendum elections and a uniform procedure for submitting petitions.

Section 4. Voter Qualifications.

Any citizen of the tribe shall be qualified to vote, provided he is at least eighteen (18) years 
of age on the date of the election and he has duly registered.

Section 5. Qualifications of Candidates.

Any citizen of the tribe, who will be at least twenty-one (21) years of age on the date of the 
election shall qualify as a candidate for membership on the executive committee, or 
subordinate body by election or appointment, except those persons previously convicted in 
any court of competent jurisdiction of a felony, or any citizen who is delinquently indebted to 
the tribe.

Section 6. Filling of Vacancies.

Any vacancy which occurs in the membership of the executive committee shall be filled for 
the unexpired term at the next duly called meeting of the general council.

Article VIII  - Meetings

(Pursuant to Amendment III, adopted June 19, 1976)

Section 1.  Annual Meetings.

Annual meetings of the general council shall be held on the third Saturday in June for the 
purpose of receiving reports and transacting any other business which may come regularly 
before the council. Bi-annually in odd-numbered years an election to fill vacancies on the 
executive committee shall take place as part of the annual meeting. Should the executive 
committee determine that it is not possible or appropriate to hold such meetings on the 
specified date, it shall then be held within thirty (30) days following, on a date to be 
determined by the executive committee; provided, that at least ten (10) days’ notice shall be 
given on such meeting.

Section 2.  Special Meetings of the General Council.

Special meetings of the general council may be called at the discretion of the president, and 
shall be called by him upon his receipt of a written request signed by twenty-five (25) citizens 
of the council, or upon written request of at least three (3) officers of the tribe. Should the 
president refuse to call such meetings for the date and time requested, any three (3) tribal 
officers shall be empowered to do so.

Section 3.  Notice of Special General Council Meeting.

The principal object of a special general council meeting must be stated in the notification 
and may include the words "and for the transaction of other business that may be 
presented.” Unless these words are added, no business may be transacted except for the 
object stated in the notice

Section 4.  Meetings of Executive Committee.

All meetings of executive committee may be called by the president at his discretion and 
shall be called by him for the date and time requested upon the written request of any three 
(3) members of the executive committee. Should he refuse to call the requested meeting, 
any three (3) members of the executive committee shall be empowered to do so.

Article IX - Vacancies
Failure to attend three (3) consecutive duly called executive committee meetings, unless 
excused by a majority of the executive committee, shall automatically result in loss of office 
for the individual concerned.

The resulting vacancy, or a vacancy created by death, resignation, recall or removal, shall 
be filled for the unexpired term in accordance with the provisions of Article VII, Section 6, of 
this constitution.

Article X - Popular Participation in Government 
Petitions for recall referendum and initiative must comply with procedures set forth in the 
election ordinance as stated in Article VII, Section 3, of this constitution.

Section 1. Recall.

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least forty (40) of the tribe's registered voters it shall 
be the duty of the president to call and conduct within fifteen (15) days, a special meeting of 
the general council to consider the recall of a member of the executive committee. Such 
meeting is subject to quorum provisions. Only one (1) member of the committee shall be 
considered for recall at any given recall meeting. Once an individual is subjected to recall 
proceedings, she shall not again be considered for such action until at least six (6) months 
have passed.

Section 2. Referendum and Initiative.

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least forty (40) of the tribe's registered voters, it shall 
be the duty of the president to call and conduct within fifteen (15) days, a special meeting 
of the general council for the purpose of presenting to the voters for their determination any 
issue or question. The decision of the majority of those voting shall be binding on the 
executive committee, provided a quorum is present.

Article XI  - Removal
The executive committee shall enact an ordinance providing for the removal of members 
of that body. Included shall be procedures for the accused to confront his accusers and 
speak on his behalf in answer to a written statement of charges at a special executive 
committee meeting, called for that purpose. The accused shall be provided with such 
written charges at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the removal meeting.

Section 1.

Article XII  - Bill Of Rights

All citizens of the tribe shall enjoy without hindrance freedom of worship, conscience, 
speech, press, assembly and association.

Section 2.

This constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize the rights and 
privileges of the citizens of the tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the United States.

Section 3.

The individual property rights of any citizen of the tribe shall not be altered, abridged or 
otherwise affected by the provision of this constitution and bylaws without the consent of 
such individual citizens.

Section 4.

The enumeration of any rights in this Article shall not be interpreted to limit the rights 
otherwise guaranteed by the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (25 USCA 1302).

Article XIII - Amendments

(Amendment XIII, adopted March 16, 2019)

Amendments to this constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the executive 
committee or by a petition signed by at least forty (40) registered voters of the tribe. The 
amendment shall be submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe and shall be effective when 
ratified by a majority of those voting in an election. .

Article XIV - Duties of Officers

(Pursuant to Amendment III, adopted June 19, 1976, Amendment V, adopted August 15, 1981, and 
Amendment XIII, adopted March 16, 2019)

Section 1. President.

The president shall preside at all meetings of the general council and of the executive 
committee. He shall have general supervision of the affairs of the general council and of the 
executive committee and shall perform all duties associated with the office of president.

Section 2. Vice-President.

The vice-president in the absence of the president shall perform the duties of that office. 
He shall serve as ex-officio member of all committees created by the executive 
committee and shall represent the president at other occasions when called upon to do 
so.

Section 3. Secretary.

The secretary shall keep an accurate account of all proceedings and official records of the 
council and of the executive committee, and shall file copies in the tribal office. He shall be 
responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all correspondence pertaining to the 
business of the council and executive committee. All official records of the secretary shall 
be open at reasonable times to the inspection of council citizens in the presence of the 
secretary. The secretary shall keep an accurate list of all general council citizens, and in 
the absence of the president and vice-president, shall preside at meetings of the general 
council or executive committee.

Section 4. Treasurer.

The treasurer shall keep account of all funds in possession of the tribe from any source. He 
shall keep an accurate record of all funds and shall make disbursements in accordance with 
a properly executed resolution of the executive committee. The treasurer shall keep all tribal 
monies entrusted to his care in special bank accounts and/or in "Individual Indian Money" 
accounts. At any time that such an account shall amount to fifty dollars ($50) or more, he 
shall file a bond satisfactory to the executive committee.

The cost of such bond shall be paid out of tribal money. The accounts and records of the 
treasurer shall be open at a reasonable time for inspection by council citizens in the 
presence of the treasurer. The books of the treasurer shall be kept in the tribal office and 
be subject to audit or inspection at the discretion of the executive committee.

Section 5.  Committeemen.

The committeemen shall perform those specific duties which shall be set forth in a 
resolution of the executive committee.

Section 6.  Transfer of Records.

At the expiration of their term of office, all officers shall turn over all tribal records and funds 
in their possession to their successors.

Article XV  - Conduct of Meetings

Section 1. Place.

All regular and special meetings of the general council and the executive committee shall 
be held at the Delaware Tribal Complex unless otherwise designated in the notice of such 
meeting.

Section 2. Robert’s Rules of Order.
All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order, unless 
otherwise specified in this constitution and bylaws.

Section 3. Quorum.
Twenty (20) citizens of the general council shall constitute a quorum. No business, other 
than the election of officers to provide for continuity of government, shall be transacted 
by the general council, unless a quorum is present. Four (4) members of the executive 
committee shall constitute a quorum to transact any business.

Article XVI  - Adoption
(Amendment XIII, adopted March 16, 2019)

This constitution and bylaws shall be effective when approved and ratified by a majority vote 
of those adult citizens of the tribe who cast ballots.

Delaware Nation Constitution Legislative History:

TRIBAL CONSTITUTION - As ratified April 21, 1973, amended March 6, 1976, June 19, 1976, August 15, 
1981, August 16, 1986, November 13, 1999, April 22, 2000 and March 16, 2019

Title

-  Amended November 13, 1999 - Change title to “Constitution of the Delaware Nation” (Amendment VIII)

Preamble

-  Amended November 13, 1999 - Add “We, the Delaware Nation, whose aboriginal name is Lenape or 

Lenni-Lenape, also known as the Grandfathers, is the oldest known Nation in the Northern Hemisphere, 
aboriginally inhabiting the Eastern Seaboard of North America, the first indigenous Nation to treat with the 
United States of America (September 17, 1778, 7 Statute 13: Brotherton Reservation), consummating a 
total of one (1) treaty with the United States of American and descending from the Cape Girardeau 
Spanish Land Grant Area..." (Amendment No. IX)

Article III - Citizenship of Tribe

-  Amended March 6, 1976 - Section 1 by changing subsection (a) language to “Those persons who prior to 
the ratification of this amendment qualified for membership under previous membership requirements” and 
removing (1), (2) and (3) beneath subsection (a); changing subsection (b) language to “All persons of 
Delaware Indian blood who received an allotment of land pursuant to the provisions of the Act of March 2, 
1895, (82 Stat. 876), shall be included as full blood members of the tribe.”; changing subsection (c) to “All 
living lineal descendants of individuals eligible for membership under the provisions of Section 1 (b) and 
Section 2 of the Article, who possess at least one-eighth (1/8) degree Delaware Indian blood and one of 
whose natural parents is a member of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma”; adding subsection (d); 
changing Section 2 language to read as “All persons identified in Section 1 (b) of this Article shall be 
considered as possessing 4/4ths degree Delaware Indian blood for the purpose of computing eligibility of 
their descendants for membership under section 1 (c) or 1 (d) of this Article. Brothers and sisters of 
Delaware Indian blood of all persons identified in Section 1 (b) shall likewise be considered as possessing 
4/4ths degree Delaware Indian Blood”; removal of Section 5; retitle Section 6 as Section 5 and change 
language to “The executive committee shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations covering 
future membership, including adoptions and the loss of membership, including adoptions and the loss of 
membership, subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his authorized 
representative.” (Amendment No I)

-  Amended August 15, 1981 - Section 1 change subsections (b) “All persons of Absentee Delaware Indian 
blood, who receives an allotment of land, under the present jurisdiction of the Anadarko Area Office, shall 
be included as full-blood members of the tribe.”; (c) “All living lineal descendants of individuals eligible for 
membership under the provisions of Section 1 (b) and Section 2 of Article III who possess at least one- 
eight (1/8) degree Absentee Delaware Indian blood.”; (d) All persons born on or after the effective date of 
this amendment, both of whose natural parents are members of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma 
regardless of degree of Absentee Delaware Indian blood.”; ;and add new subsection (e) “The Delaware 
Indian blood for all members of the Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma shall be shown on the 
membership roll as Delaware Tribe of Western Oklahoma Indian blood”; change all language in Section 2 
to “All persons identified in Section 1 (b) of Article III shall be considered as possessing 4/4ths degree 
Absentee Delaware Indian blood for the purpose of computing eligibility of their descendants for 
membership under Section 1 (c) or 1 (d) of this Article. Brothers and sisters of Absentee Delaware Indian 
blood of all persons identified in Section 1 (b) shall likewise be considered as possessing 4/4ths degree 
Absentee Delaware Indian blood.” (Amendment No. IV)

-  Amended November 13, 1999 - All language referencing “Membership” shall be changed to read 

“Citizenship” (Amendment No. X)

-  Amended March 16, 2019 -Section 1 (c) by removing “who possess at least one eight degree Absentee 
Delaware Indian blood” and Section 1 (a) by removing “subject to the approval of the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs or his authorized representative” (Amendment No. XII)

Article V  - Executive Committee

-  Amended June 19, 1976 - In Section 3 change language as follows “The Secretary shall keep an 

accurate account of all proceedings and official records of the council and of the executive committee, and 
shall file copies in the tribal office. He shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all 
correspondence pertaining to the business of the council and executive committee. All official records of 
the secretary shall be open at reasonable times to the inspection of council members in the presence of 
the secretary. The secretary shall keep an accurate list of all general council members, and in the 
absence of the president and vice-president preside at meetings of the general council or executive 
committee.” (Amendment No. III)

-  Amended August 15, 1981 - In Section 4 change language as follows “The treasurer shall be the 

custodian of all funds in possession of the tribe from any source.” to “The treasurer shall keep account of 
all funds in possession of the tribe from any source.”; remove the language “and/or in “Individual Indian 
Money” accounts; change language from “the Commissioner of Indian Affairs” to “the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs” (Amendment No. V)

Article VI  - Powers

-  Amended August 16, 1986 - Section 1 by adding “The Delaware Executive Committee shall have 

specific authority to act on the following matters” and to add subsections (a), (b), (c), (d), (e) and (f); and 
add Section 2 (Amendment No. VI)

-  Amended April 22, 2000 - Section 2 all language referencing “Tribe” shall be changed to read “Nation” 
and add after ..now or in the future “as presented to and approved by majority vote by members at duly 
called or scheduled General Council meetings”(Amendment No. XI)

-  Amended March 16, 2019 - Section 1 (a) and (b) by removing “subject to the approval of the Assistant 
Secretary for Indian Affairs or his/her authorized representative, as long as such approval is required by 
Federal statute and/or regulations” (Amendment No. XIII)

Article VII  - Elections

- Amended June 19, 1976 - Section 1 changing to Bi-annual Elections of the Executive Committee and 

Section 2 to denote the annual meeting of the general council as the third Saturday in June. (Amendment 
No. II)

Article VIII  - Meetings

- Amended June 19, 1976 - Section 1 to add “Bi-annually in odd-numbered years an election to fill 

vacancies on the executive committee shall take place as part of the annual meeting.” (Amendment No. 
 
 
II)

 
 Article XIII  - Amendments

- Amended March 16, 2019 - by removing “approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs” and “called by 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs”; by removing “A petition for such purpose must comply with 25 CFR 
53.” (Amendment No. XIII)

Article XIV  - Duties of Officers

- Amended March 16, 2019 - Section 4 by removing “and the Bureau of Indian Affairs” (Amendment No.
 
 

XIII)

 
 Article XV - Conduct of Meetings

- Amended August 16, 1986 - change meeting place from “Anadarko Agency” to “Delaware Tribal

Complex” (Amendment No. VII)

Article XVI - Adoption

Amended March 16, 2019 - by removing “approved by the Secretary of the Interior and authorized by 
the Secretary of the Interior” (Amendment No. XIII)

