 
  
 UNITED STATES  
 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 Sacramento Area Office 
2800 Cottage Way 
Sacramento, California 95825

Mr. Richard H. Burcell

Superintendent, Central California Agency

Dear Mr. Burcell:

AUG 29 1977

Resolution No. 77-2 adopted by the Dry Creek Rancheria on May 22, 
1977, sets forth an amendment to its Articles of Association.

In that the Articles of Association have never been amended, the 
present amendment will be numbered Amendment I. This amendment 
amends Article I - Name, by changing the name to the Dry Creek 
Rancheria.

Amendment I to the Articles of Association of the Dry Creek 
Rancheria is hereby approved and returned for delivery to the 
community. As provided in Article XII of the Articles, the 
amendment becomes effective this date.

Sincerely yours,

Area Director
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, WILLIAM E. FINALE, Sacramento Area Director,

Bureau of Indian Affairs, Sacramento, California, by virtue of 

the authority granted to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 

Article XII of the Articles of Association of the Dry Creek 

Rancheria and redelegated to me by 10 BIAM 3.1, do hereby approve 

foregoing amendment I to the Articles of Association of the  

Dry Creek Rancheria.

Sacramento, California

Date: AUG 29 1977

Area Director
 
 

DRY CREEK RANCHERIA

 
 Sonoma County, California

RESOLUTION 77-2

RE: Amendment to Articles of Association

WHEREAS, on September 13, 1972, the Dry Creek Rancheria Indians adopted 
Articles of Association, in order to establish a formal organization 
and to promote the general welfare of the people, said Articles of 
Association being made effective upon approval by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior on April 16, 1973, and

WHEREAS, Article I recites that the name of the organization shall be 
the Dry Creek Rancheria Tribal Council and Article IV states that the 
Tribal Council shall consist of all members over 16 years of age. This 
wording automatically excludes any one under 16 from being a member of 
the organization, and

it was recommended that Article I be amended to include all 
 
 
WHEREAS, 

 
 persons under 18 years of age.

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED, that Article I be amended to read "The 
name of this organization shall be the Dry Creek Rancheria.”
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 The undersigned certifies that the foregoing resolution was adopted at 
a referendum election held May 22, 1977, which election was
participated in by a majority of the eligible voters of the Dry Creek 
Rancheria, by a vote of 18 "for”, 0 "against” and 0 
"abstaining", and that said resolution has not been rescinded or 
amended in any way.

Tribal Operations 
076.2 Dry Creek

NOV 1 1979

Ms. Amy Martin, Chairperson
Dry Creek Rancheria
P.O. Box 413
Geyserville, California 95441

Dear Ms. Martin:

The four (4) Amendments to the Article of Association that were 
passed at the General Membership Meeting on September 22, 1979, 
are in effect.

They became in effect the day the General Membership approved 
them. In our October 16, 1979 memo to the Area Director, we stated 
that in accordance with Article XIII of the Articles of Association 
for Dry Creek Rancheria, chat no other approval authority is 
required. In the Area Director's memo of October 19, 1979, he 
concurred with our decision.

Should you have any questions, feel free to contact our office.

Sincerely yours,

Richard H. Bureau
/SGD/ 

Superintendent
 
  
 

DRY CREEK RANCHERIA

 
 3250 Highway 128 East 
Geyserville, CA. 95441 
(707) 433- 1209 
 

RESOLUTION


WHEREAS, these amendments to the Articles of Association of Dry Creek 

Rancheria were proposed to the membership at the general 
meeting on April 29, 1979:

Amendment I:

Article V of the Articles, Meetings, shall be amended by sub
stituting "fifteen (15%)" in place of "twenty-five (25%)." Article 
V as amended shall read as follows:

Meetings of the Tribal Council will be held during the 
months of April and September of each year, at times 
and places to be prescribed by the Chairman. Special 
meetings may be called by the Chairman, or by any 
two (2) members of the Board of Directors, provided 
that seven (7) days notice be given stating the purpose of 
the meeting. No business shall be conducted in the ab
sence of a quorum consisting of not less than fifteen (15%) 
percent of the voting membership.

Amendment II:

Article VII of the Articles, Board of Directors, shall be amended 
by adding (a) Procedure for Recall. Section (a) shall read as 
follows:

(a) Procedure for Recall:

In the event of recall of a member of the Board of 
Directors for any reason, the same shall be accom
plished by majority vote of duly qualified voting 
members of the Tribal Council, at a special meeting 
of the Council for that purpose, written notice of

such meeting having been duly given at Least seven (7) 
days prior to the date of such special meeting.

Amendment III:

Article XIII of the Articles, Amendments, shall be amended by 
substituting "thirty percent (30%)" in place of "fifty-one per
cent (51%)." Article XIII as amended shall read as follows:

The Articles of Association may be amended by a majority 
vote of the eligible voters of the Tribal Council, provided 
at Least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters partici
pate in a referendum election called for that purpose. A 
referendum election to amend the Articles of Association 
must be preceded by a duly called meeting of the Tribal 
Council at which the proposed amendments has been ex
plained.

Amendment IV:

By adding Article XIV to the Articles. Article XIV to read as 
follows:

Article XIV - Housing Authority:

Tribal Council shall have the power to enact an ordinance 
for the purpose of establishing a housing authority or to 
join an existing housing authority.

and

WHEREAS, the membership reviewed and discussed these amendments at the 

general meeting of September 22, 1979, and

WHEREAS, the members feel it is within the best interest of Dry Creek 
Rancheria to incorporate these amendments into the existing 

 Articles of Association.

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED that Amendment numeral I, II, III, 

and IV respectively be approved by the Tribal Council of Dry 
Creek Rancheria.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 This is to certify that the above Resolution was duly adopted at a meeting of 
Dry Creek Rancheria members, a quorum of 51% of the eligible voters being 
present, as required by Article XIII, on September 22, 1979, by a vote of 
16 ayes, 0 nays and 0 abstaining.

Dry Creek Rancheria

3250 HWY 128 EAST, P.O. BOX 607, GEYSERVILLE, CA 95441 
PHONE: (707) 857-3045 FAX: (707) 857-3047

RESOLUTION NO. 96-28-12

WHEREAS, Dry Creek Rancheria (“the Tribe”) is a federally recognized Indian tribe 

organized under the tribe’s Articles of Association (“the Articles”) adopted 
on September 13,1972,and approved by the Deputy Assistant Secretary of 
the Interior on April 16,1973,by virtue of powers inherent in America; and

WHEREAS, The Tribal Council shall elect from its membership a Board of Directors 
amd all powers and responsibilities shall be vested in the Tribal Council 
which may delegate powers to the Board of Directors pursuant to Article 
IV of the Articles.

NOW, THEREFORE IT HEREBY BE MUTUALLY AGREED that the Dry Creek 
Band of Pomo Indians authorize the Board of Directors to pass resolutions and/or 
ordinances so they could do business for the Rancheria with Northern Circle Housing 
Authority and other agreements that the Bioard of Directors need to handle, and to 
represent the community in all negotiations with the federal government, pursuant to 
Article VII of the Articles
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 The foregoing resolution was presented at a General Membership Meeting of the Tribal 
Council on the 28 day of December 1996, with a quorum present. Motion was
made by Stan Cordova seconded by Dustin Cordova and approved
by a vote of 35 ayes, 5 noes, and 0 abstentions 116 absentees.
 
  
 

ATTESTED

 
 Gregg Cordova,Tribal Chairperson 
 

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
OF THE
DRY CREEK RANCHERIA

PREAMBLE


We, the Indians of the Dry Creek Rancheria, in order to establish a formal 
organization and to promote the general welfare of our people in building 
unity, development of tribal lands, creation of resources and ocher human 
development as deemed necessary, do hereby adopt the following Articles of 
Association.

The name of this organization shall be the Dry Creek Rancheria Tribal 
Council, hereinafter referred to as the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of Che Tribal Council shall extend to the Land now and 
hereafter comprised within the Dry Creek Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 The general membership shall consist of all chose persons in che following 
categories, who have completed are application for membership.

A. Persons living on the effective day of this document whose 
names appear on the census of che Indians in, near and up Dry Creek 
from Healdsburg and on the census of Indians in and near Geyserville
 included in a letter dated June 4, 1915, from John J. Terrell, Special 

.

Indian Agent, to Hon. Cato Sells, Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

B. Persons Living on Che effective daCe of chis document, and chose 
born thereafter whose ancestors are named on the census roils described 
in (a) above, regardless of whether che named ancestors are living or 
deceased.

C. Spouses of members who hold valid assignments on the rancheria, 
providing che, spouse is a California Indian.

D. Persons who meet the requirements of A, B and C above, shall be 
ineligible for membership if they have been affiliated with any
other tribe, band or group to the extent of being included on a 
formal membership roll, have received an allotment or formal assign
ment of land or have been named as a distributee or dependent family 
number of a distributee in a reservation distribution plan.
 
 

 
 
 E. The Board of Direccars, as provided far in Article IV, shall 
keep the membership roll current by removing the names of persons 
who became ineligible for membership, ar who relinquish their 
membership in writing, and by adding the names of new members.
 
 

ARTICLE TV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 The governing body shall be the Tribal Council, which shall consist of 
all members eighteen (13) years of age or over. Subject to any limitations 
imposed by the applicable statutes of the United States or the State of 
California, all powers and responsibilities shall be vested in the Tribal 
Council which may delegate powers to the Board of Directors. The Tribal 
Council shall elect from its membership a Board of Directors consisting 
of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary—Treasurer and two (2) delegates, 
and such other temporary or permanent committees as are deemed necessary 
by the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - MEETINGS

 
 Meetings of Che Tribal Council will be held during che months of April 
and September of each year, at times and places to be prescribed by the 
Chairman. Special meetings may be called by che Chairman or by any two 
(2) members of che Board of Directors, provided that seven (7) days 
notice be given stating the purpose of the meeting. No business shall 
be conducted in che absence of a quorum consisting of not Less than 
 twenty-five (25%) percent of the voting membership. 
fifteen (15%) percent

ARTICLE VI - VOTING RIGHTS & ELECTIONS

Any member of che Tribal Council, eighteen (18) years of age or older shall 
have the right to vote and if duly nominated and elected may hold office. 
All elections, whether for office or referendum, shall ba by secret ballot. 
Notice of an election shall be given in writing seven (7) days prior Co 
che election day. Nomination of officers shall be held each two years at 
the tribal council meeting in September. The date for the election is to 
be selected at this meeting. A member must be present at the site as the 
election to vote.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 The Board of Directors shall take such actions as are necessary to carry 
into effect the ordinances, resolutions, or other directions of the Tribal 
Council, represent the community in all negotiations with local, state and 
federal governments and shall faithfully adivse the Tribal Council of all

such negotiations. Members of the Board of Directors shall hold office 
for two years, or until their successors are duly elected and installed.

If an officer shall die, resign, be found guilty of a felony, or be 
recalled from office, the vacancy so created shall be filled by the 

Board of Directors at its next meeting, and the replacement shall serve 

out the unexpired term of office of his predecessor.

(a) Procedures for Recall: In the event of recall of a member of Directors 
for any reason, the same shall be accomplished by majority vote of duly 
qualified voting members of the Tribal Council, at a special meeting of the 
Council for that purpose, written notice of such meeting having been duly 
given at least seven (7) days prior to the date of such special meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - MEETINGS OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 The Board of Directors shall meet once a month at a time and place set 
by the Chairman. Notice of meeting shall be given at least 48 hours 
in advance either by mail or verbal communication. Special meetings 
shall be convened on call of the Chairman or by two (2) board members. 
Written notice, stating che purpose of che meeting must be given 24 
hours in advance of che meeting dace. A quorum shall consist of three 
(3) members, and no business shall be conducted in tire absence of a 
quorum. 
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ASSIGNMENTS 

 
 The power of the Tribal Council to make assignments of land on the Dry 
Creak Rancheria shall ba sac forth in an assignment ordinance, passed 
by the Tribal Council and approved by the Secretary of the Interior or 
his authorized representative. Members who own a home or are buying a 
home off the rancheria will not be eligible for an assignment on the 
rancheria. 
 
 

ARTICLE X - BILL OF RIGHTS 

 
 .

The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1968 (32 Scat. 73) against actions off a tribe in the exercise off 
its powers off self-government shall apply to the Dry Creek Rancheria, 
its officers and all persons within its jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 A.  The chairman of che Board off Directors shall preside at all meetings 
off the Tribal Council and off the Board off Directors, and shall execute 
an behalf off the rancheria all contracts, leases, or other documents 
approved by the Tribal Council. He shall have general supervision off 
all other officers, employees and committees of the rancheria and see
that their duties are properly performed. When neither the Tribal 
Council nor the Board off Directors is in session, he shall be the 
official representative off the rancheria.

B.  The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman when called upon to do so, 
and in the absence off the chairman he shall have the duties of that officer.
 
 

 
 
 
    
 
 
 
 C. The secretary-treasurer shall keep the minutes of all meetings and 
shall attest to the enactment of all resolutions and ordinances. Copies 
of all minutes, resolutions, and ordinances shall be submitted by him to 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs as soon after enactment as possible. The 
secretary-treasurer shall carry out the financial directives of the Tribal 
Council, recieve all local monies of the rancheria, and keep an accurate 
account of the receipts and disbursements. Funds shall be deposited in 
the rancheria account in a local bank selected by the Tribal Council where 
depositors' funds are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. 
All disbursements shall be made by check in accordance with resolutions of 
the Tribal Council and shall be co-signed by the chairman or the vice- 
chairman in the absence of the chairman. The secretary-treasurer shall 
file a bond satisfactory co the Tribal Council and rhe Area Director, 
when either are of the opinion sufficient funds have accumulated in the 
rancheria treasury. The Tribal Council shall authorize payment of the 
annual, bond premium from the local rancheria funds. The secretary-treasurer 
shall give a financial report to the Tribal Council at each meeting, and 
all financial records shall be available for inspection by any member of 
the Dry Creek Indian Rancheria and by representatives of the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - ADOPTION

 
 The Articles of Association shall be effective upon approval of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Within sixty (60) days after Che document 
has been approved, the Tribal Council shall elect a Board of Directors, 
pursuant co Articles IV and VI of these articles.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII  - AMENDMENTS

 
 The Articles of Association may be amended by a majority vote of the 
percent 
eligible voters of the Tribal Council, provided at least fifty-one 
(51%) of the eligible voters participate in a referendum election called 
for that purpose. A referendum election to amend the Articles of 
Association must be preceded by a duly called meeting of the Tribal 
Council at which the proposed amendment has been explained.

of establishing a housing authority or to join an existing housing authority.

Tribal Council shall have the power to enact an ordinance for the purpose 
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - HOUSING AUTHORITY 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION

 
 The undersigned certifies that the foregoing Articles of Association were 
adopted ac a referendum election held September 13, 1972, which election 
was participated in by a majority of the adult Indians of Cha Dry Creek 
Rancheria, resulting in a vote of 17 for, and 0 against.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 The foregoing Articles of Association of the Dry Creek Rancheria, 

adopted September 13, 1972, are hereby approved with the understanding 

that (1) Public Law 280 is applicable to Territory; (2) that the word 

"ancestors" as it appears in Section B of Article III means lineal 

ancestors; and (3) that the felonious conviction justifying removal 

of an official from office under Article VII of these Articles of 

Association must occur during the term of office from which Che official 

is to be removed.

Date: APR 16 1973

Washington, D. C.
 
  
 

DRY CREEK RANCHERIA

 
 3250 Highway 128 East 
Geyserville, CA. 95441 
(707 ) 433-1209 
 

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
OF THE 
DRY CREEK RANCHERIA

PREAMBLE


We, the Indians of the Dry Creek Rancheria, in order to establish a 
formal organization, and to promote the general welfare of our 
people in building unity, development of Tribal lands, creation of 
resources, and other human development as deemed necessary, do 
we hereby adopt the following Articles of Association.
 
 

ARTICLE I-  NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Dry Creek Rancheria, 
herein after referred to as the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE II-  TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Tribal Council shall extend to the land now, 
and hereafter comprised within the Dry Creek Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE III-  MEMBERSHIP

 
 The general membership shall consist of all persons in the following 

categories, who have completed an application for membership.

A.  Persons living on the effective day of this document whose 
names appear on the census of the Indians in, near, and up Dry 
Creek, from Healdsburg, and on the census of Indians in and near 
Geyserville, included in a letter dated June 4,1915, from John J. 
Terrell, Special Agent, to Hon. Cato Sells, Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

B.  Persons living on the effective date of this document and those 

born thereafter whose ancestors are named on the census rolls 
described in (A) above, regardless whether the named ancestors are 
living or deceased.

C.  Spouses of members who hold valid assignments on the 

Rancheria, providing the spouse is a California Indian.

D.  Persons who meet the requirements of A, B,and C above, shall 

be ineligible for membership if they have been affiliated with any 
other tribe, band or group to the extent of being included on a formal 
roll, have received an allotment or formal assignment of land or have 
been named as a distributee or dependent family member of a 
distributee in a reservation, distribution plan.

E.  The Board of Directors, as provided for in ARTICLE IV, shall 
keep the membership roll current by removing the names of persons 
who become ineligible for membership, who relinquish their 
membership in writing, and by adding the names of new members.
 
 

ARTICLE IV- GOVERNING BODY

 
 The governing body shall be the Tribal Council, which shall consist of 
all members eighteen (18) years of age or over. Subject to any 
limitations imposed by the applicable statutes of the United States, or 
the State of California, and all powers and responsibilities shall be 
vested in the Tribal Council which may delegate powers to the Board 
of Directors. The Tribal Council shall elect from its membership a 
Board of Directors consisting of a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, 
Secretary-Treasurer, and two delegates, and such other temporary, 
or permanent committees as are deemed necessary by the Tribal 
Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V-MEETINGS

 
 Meetings of the Tribal Council will be held during the months of 
April and September of each year, at times and places to be 
prescribed by the Chairman. Special meetings may be called by the 
Chairman or by any two (2) members of the Board of Directors, 
provided that seven (7) days notice be given stating the purpose of 
the meeting. No business shall be conducted in the absence of a

quorum consisting or not less chan fifteen (15%) percent of the 
voting membership.

ARTICLE VI-VOTING RIGHTS & ELECTIONS

Any member of the Tribal Council, eighteen (18) years or older shall 
have the right to vote and if duly nominated and elected may hold 
office. All elections, whether for office or referendum, shall be by 
secret ballot. Notice of an election shall be given in waiting seven (7) 
days prior to the election. Nomination of officers shall be held each 
two years at the Tribal Council meeting in September. The date for 
the election is to be selected at this meeting. A member must be 
present at the site of the election to vote.
 
 

ARTICLE VII-BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 The Board of Directors shall take such actions as are necessary to 
carry into effect the Ordinances, Resolutions, or other directions of 
the Tribal Council, represent the community in all negotiations with 
local, state, and federal governments and shall faithfully advise the 
Tribal Council of all such negotiations. Members of the Board of 
Directors shall hold office for two years, or until their successors are 
duly elected and installed. If an officer shall die ,resign, be found 
guilty of a felony ,or be recalled from office, the vacancy so created 
shall be filled by the Board of Directors at its next meeting, and the 
replacement shall serve out the unexpired term of his predecessor.

A. In the event of recall of a member of the Board of Directors for 
any reason, the same shall be accomplished by majority vote of duly 
qualified voting members of the Tribal Council, at a special meeting 
of the Council for that purpose, written notice of such meeting having 
been duly given at least seven (7) days prior to rhe date of such 
special meeting 

.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII-MEETING OF BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 •

The Board of Directors shall meet once a month at a time and place 
set by the Chairman. Notice of meeting shall be given at least forty- 
eight (48) hours in advance either by mail or by verbal 
communication. Special meetings shall be convened on a call of the 
Chairman or by two (2) board members. Written notice, stating the 
purpose of the meeting must be given twenty-four (24) hours in 
advance of the meeting date. A quorum shall consist of three (3)

members, and no business shall be conducted in the presence of a 
quorum.
 
 

ARTICLE IX-ASSIGNMENT 

 
 The power of the Tribal Council to make assignments of land on the 
Dry Creek Rancheria shall be sec forth in an assignment ordinance, 
passed by the Tribal Council and approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative. Members who own a home 
or are buying a home off the Rancheria will not be eligible for an 
assignment on the Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE X-BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil 
Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 73) against actions of a tribe in the 
exercise of its powers of self-government shall apply to the Dry 
Creek Rancheria, its officers and all persons within its jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE XI-DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 A.  The Chairman of the Board of Directors shall preside at ail 

meetings of the Tribal Council and of the Board of Directors, and shall 
execute all on behalf of the Rancheria all contracts, leases, or other 
documents approved by the Tribal Council. He shall have general 
supervision of all other officers, employes and committees of the 
Rancheria and see that their duties are properly performed. When 
neither the Tribal Council nor the Board of Directors is in session, he 
shall be the official representative of the Rancheria.

B.  The Vice-Chairman shall assist the Chairman when called upon 
to do so, and in the absence of the Chairman he shall have the duties 
of that officer.

C.  The Secretary-Treasure shall keep the minutes of ail meetings, 

and shall attest to the enactment of all resolutions and 
ordinances.Copies of all minutes, resolutions, and ordinances shall be 
submitted by him to the Bureau of Indian Affairs as soon after 
enactment as possible. The Secretary-Treasure shall carry the 
financial directives of the Tribal Council, receive all local monies of 
the Rancheria, and keep an accurate account of the receipts and 
disbursements. Funds shall be deposited in the Rancheria Account in

a local bank: selected by the Tribal Council where depositors' funds 
axe insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. All 
disbursement shall be made by check in accordance with resolutions 
of the Tribal Council and shall be co-signed by the Chairman, or the 
Vice Chairman in the absence of the Chairman. The Secretary- 
treasure shall file a bond satisfactory co the Tribal Council and the 
Area Director, when either are of the opinion sufficient funds have 
accumulated in the Rancheria Treasury. The Tribal Council shall 
authorize payment of the annual bond premium from the local 
Rancheria funds. The Secretary-Treasurer shall give a financial 
report to the Tribal Council at each meeting, and all financial records 
shall be available for inspection by any member of the Dry Creek 
Indian Rancheria and by representatives of the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs.
 
 

 ARTICLE XII ADOPTION

 
 The Article of Association shall be effective upon approval of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Within sixty (60) days after the 
Document has been approved, the Tribal Council shall elect a Board of 
Directors, pursuant to Articles IV and VI of these Articles.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII-AMENDENTS

 
 The Articles of Association may be amended by a majority vote of 
the eligible voters of the Tribal Council, provided at least thirty 
percent (30%) of the eligible voters participate in a referendum 
election called for that purpose. A referendum election to amend the 
Articles of Association must be preceded by a duly called meeting of 
the Tribal Council at which the proposed amendments have been 
explained.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV-HOUSING AUTHORITY

 
 Tribal Council shall have the power to enact an ordinance for the 
purpose of establishing a housing authority or co join an existing 
authority.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 The undersigned certifies that the foregoing Articles of Association 
were adopted at a referendum election held September 13, 1972,

which election was participated in a majority of the adult Indians of 
the Dry Creek Rancheria, resulting in a vote 17 for, and 0 against.

Otis J.Lozinto, Chairman 
Dry Creek Rancheria

This is to attest this document is retyped from the original dated 13 
Sep 72 with the amendments of 29 Aug 77 included.

George R.Somersall 
Chairman 10 Dec88 
Dry Creek Rancheria

