Duwamish Constitution 
(Duwamish People, 1925)

The Duwamish were one of several small tribal nations (e.g., 
Suquamish, Snoqualmie, Stilliguamish, Snohomish, Skagit) who, 
under duress, negotiated and signed the Treaty of Point Elliott with 
the United States on January 22, 1855 (12 Stat. 927). In this land
cession treaty, the several tribes relinquished nearly eleven million 
acres of their territory in exchange for various financial and other 
inducements, including recognition of their sovereign status and pro
prietary rights to their much-reduced remaining lands. It would be 
nearly four years before the treaty was finally ratified by the U.S. 
Senate and proclaimed by the president in March 1859.

Historically, the Duwamish lived in several villages along the 
river bearing their name, and their territory encompassed what became 
the city of Seattle, which is named after Chief Seattle, or Sieahl, the 
first signer of the Point Elliott Treaty. Upon ratification of the agree
ment, the Duwamish gradually scattered widely and became deeply 
impoverished as their lands were settled by non-Indians.

The Duwamish struggled to retain their political autonomy, and in 
February 1925 the tribe’s leaders, who had organized the Duwamish 
Tribal Organization, adopted their nation’s first written constitution. 
This document laid out the organization’s purpose, defined member
ship requirements, and identified the officers—president, secretary
treasurer, and business council members—all of whom were to hold 
office indefinitely until they voluntarily resigned or “unless [they 

were] otherwise disqualified by charges made by a member or mem
bers” in good standing.

The Duwamish gradually became landless, and by the 1960s the 
BIA was no longer recognizing them as a distinct political entity. This 
diminished political status was judicially affirmed by U.S. District 
Judge George Boldt, author of the famous Boldt decision of 1974, 
which affirmed the right of certain treaty tribes to 50 percent of the 
commercial harvest of salmon. The Duwamish had sought inclusion 
in this settlement, in United States v. Washington (476 F. Supp. 1101 
[1979]). However, Boldt ruled that, although it was clear that the tribe 
had had dealings with federal and state officials, it had not continued 
to exist as a continuous “separate, distinct, and cohesive Indian cul
tural or political entity”; therefore, they were ineligible to exercise 
fishing rights as a treaty tribe.

Presently, the Duwamish are continuing their efforts to reestab

lish their political status as a recognized native nation.

Harmon, Alexandra. Indians in the Making: Ethnic Relations and Indian 
Identities around Puget Sound (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1998).
Suttlese, Wayne, and Barbara Lane “Southern Coast Salish.” In Handbook 
of North American Indians, vol. 7, gen. ed. William C. Sturtevant (Washington, 
D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1980), 485-502.

Copy of this constitution in author’s possession.

Constitution and Bylaws of the Duwamish 
Tribal Organization

February 6, 1925.
At Renton, King County, 
Washington.

Article I

This organization shall be known as the Duwamish Tribal Organization, of the 
Duwamish American Indians.

Article II

(Statement of purpose)

The purpose of this tribal organization shall be:
1.  To promote, and co-operate with efforts and more perfect union and educa
tional development of its members. [sic]

2.  The establishment and cultivation of a clear acquaintance and comradeship 
among its members and to provide adequate meeting and discussion.

3.  To promote morality, a good citizenship, of the younger generation, and to 
obtain all the rights thereof for its members.

4.  To promote the study and to preserve the history and the traditions of the 
Duwamish tribe.
5.  To promote the general welfare of the Duwamish tribe, and advancement of 
its members, and to investigate the legal problems of the Duwamish tribe, and 
to oppose any movement which may be detrimental to its tribe.

Article III

(Membership)

Section i

A.  The membership of this organization shall be divided into classes, namely: 
Active Indian, and junior of Indian blood only of the Duwamish tribe.
B.  Active members shall be adults, persons of Indian blood only, and shall be 
descendants of the Duwamish tribe, shall be eligible for membership, and can 
vote and hold office.

C.  Junior members shall be Indians and Indian blood under the age of twenty- 
one years.

Article IV

(Officers)

Section 1. The Officers of this organization shall be a President, a Secretary
Treasurer, and a business council.

Section 2. The Officers shall hold office until removed by death, [or] 
unless otherwise disqualified by charges made by a member or members of the 
organization in good standing.

All charges must be furnished in writing to the Secretary and supported by 
affidavits duly sworn to before a notary public, and two-thirds votes of the Council 
and of the members present at a special meeting called for that purpose.

Section 3. Only active members of good standing shall be eligible to hold 

office in the organization, either elective or appointive.

Section 4. The board of council and the members of the organization shall 
have the right to choose and appoint from its members to fill any vacancies that 
may be caused by death of any officers, and said appointed to hold office until 
the next regular meeting held on the first Saturday in May of each year, and the 
members shall determine the election of the said appointed or other selection 
and nomination for election.

Section 5. The President shall be a member and Chairman of the Board of 
Council; it shall be the duty of the President to preside in all meetings of the 
organization and of the Council, to see that the By-laws of the organization are 
regularly enforced, to call special meetings of the organization when requested 
by ten (10) or more members, or by the Board of Councils, and to provide on 
all public occasions unless otherwise arranged.

Section 6. The Board of Council shall have the right to appoint any of its 
members to perform the duties and exercise the powers of the President in his 
absence or disability of the President.

Section 7. The secretary shall be a member of the Board of Council, and 
shall keep a record of all proceedings of the organization and of the Councils, 
and shall receive and file the written reports of all officers and committees; 
each year he shall submit a written report of his activities, reading it at the 
yearly convention; and he shall receive all applications for membership of the 
tribe, and shall be ex-officio member of all committees, he shall have charge 
of all such documents and records which the organization shall order to be 
printed, and he shall submit all membership applications of the tribe to the 
presiding Chairman at the annual convention, to be determined by the Board of 
Council and the President.

Section 8. The Secretary-Treasurer shall be authorized and directed by 
Councils to receive all moneys belonging to the organization and to dispose of the 
same only when authorized by the President and the Council for expenses only.

Article V

(Board of Council)

Section 1. The President, the Secretary-Treasurer, and the Council members 
shall constitute the Board of Councils.

Section 2. The President and the Secretary and Councils shall be elected at 
the regular annual meeting held on the first Saturday of May of each year, and 
shall hold office until removed by death or by resignation.

Section 3. The council shall consist of six (6) members elected by the 
Duwamish tribal organization, they shall act in the best interest of the tribe, 
they shall have the power and duty to transact such business as it may come 
before the Council for the best interest of the tribe, and no business shall be 
transacted without the approval of the President.

Section 4. The Board of Council shall direct the policy of the organization 
and be responsible for its management, and shall have power to determine any 
application for enrollments with the approval of the President.

Section 5. The membership in all classes, shall be determined and elected 

by the Board of Councils, with the approval of the President.

Section 6. Six members shall constitute a quorum of the Board of Councils.
Section 7. The Board of Councils shall authorize all expenditures of the 
organization funds, for any expenses, for rent of Hall, and President’s traveling 
expenses on any matters concerning the Duwamish tribe, or any meeting where 
he may represent the part of the Duwamish tribe.

Article VI

(Dues)

Section I. The annual dues in this organization shall be One ($1.00) Dollar, pay
able in advance, except Junior members, which dues shall be fifty cents a year.

Article VII

(Committees)

Section I. The President shall have power to appoint Committees for any busi
ness or representation, and dismiss such Committees or other Committees as 
the members of Councils shall authorize.

Article VIII

(Meetings)

Section I. The regular annual meeting of the organization shall be held on 
the first Saturday of May at the hour of 10 o’clock a.m. at the home grounds, 
Renton, King County, State of Washington.

Section 2. The order of business shall be: Reading of the Minutes of the 
previous meeting, reports of officers, reports of Committees; unfinished busi
ness; new business; to fill any vacancies of the officers that [were] caused by 
death; determining application for membership and enrollment.

Section 3. Robert’s Rules of Order shall be final authority on all questions 

of procedure.

Section 4. A quorum shall consist of not less than twenty members and a 
majority of the Councils Chairman, Secretary, shall constitute a quorum of the 
organization. [ sic ]

Section 5. Special meetings may be held at any time upon a call by the 
President or upon written request of ten (10) or more members of organization, 
or of the Board of Councils, upon ten (10) days’ notice.

Section 6. The Board of Councils shall prepare for the annual meeting a 
program on such topics as are of interest to the membership, and any member 
may bring up any business for action or discussion.

Article IX

(Amendments)

Section 1. These by-laws may be amended at any regular meeting of this tribal 
organization, provided, written notice of such proposed amendments shall be 
filed with the Secretary of the organization not less than two weeks before such 
meeting, upon two-thirds vote of the members present.

