CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR GOVERNING THE 
INDIANS OF THE WIND RIVER RESERVATION, WYO.

We, the Shoshone and Arapahoe Indians of the Wind River Reservation, in 

order to administer the affairs of our reservation for our best interests, for 
the protection of our rights, to promote progress, to provide for our gen
eral welfare and that of our posterity, do ordain and establish thia Con
stitution of the Wind River Reservation, State of Wyoming.

We, the Indians of the Wind River Reservation, have formulated the 
following rules and duties for the governing of our affairs through what is 
known as the Shoshone and Arapahoe Business Council.

Section I.

A.  Such Council is to consist of six members duly elected from each 

tribe, and must be regularly enrolled members of each tribe. They 
must be residents of this reservation, past twenty-one years of 
age, and of good character. The Council members shall be elected 
from their respective tribes.

B.  Duties of the Business Council. The Superintendent is authorized 
to call meetings whenever he deems it necessary; also, the Chair
man of the joint councils my call special meetings upon the written 
request of three council members, or fifty members of the tribe. 
All newly elected members must take oath of office and be installed 
at the first called meeting in January following election.

Council members of each tribe are to elect by secret ballot one of 
the members to act as chairmen for a period of six (6) months, after 
which time a member duly elected can be reelected, or another member 
duly elected to take over the duties as chairman. The chairmen 
are to serve at alternate joint meetings. The Superintendent of 
the Reservation shall preside over the first meeting of the newly 
elected Councils until the Chairman of each Council is chosen. As 
soon as the chairmen are elected, the Superintendent will yield the 
Chair to either of the two chairmen ha designates.

All meetings are to be conducted in an orderly manner and accord
ing to the usage of Parliamentary law.

The minutes of the meetings are to be kept by a clerk of the Agency 
Office furnished by the Superintendent, and such minutes are to be 
taken in the form of a transcript and copies furnished members of 
the Business Council, and the record transmitted by the Superintendent 
to the Office of Indian Affairs at Washington, D. C., and such 
others as the Council may request. Whenever the chairman wishes 
to vote on a question, he may request the Superintendent to pre
side over the meeting until such vote is taken.

C. 

It is understood that mil tribal business transacted must be done 
at a Joint session of the Business Council in the Council Hall at 
the Wind River Agency, Fort Washakie, Wyoming. Before a meeting 
can conduct business it is necessary that four members from each 
tribe be present.

All measures, except amendments 
approved or rejected by a majority vote of those members present.

uncil must be

Council members are expected to attend meetings regularly. Absence 
of a member from the Council meetings three consecutive time with
out excuse sufficiently acceptable to the majority of his respective 
council will terminate his tenure of office. Each council has auth
ority to appoint a qualified member of its tribe to fill a vacancy 
occurring through death, resignation, or dismissal.

By a majority vote of the members of his Council at a Joint Council 
meeting a member can be dismissed if the charges are preferred be
cause of law violations or misconduct.

D.  The dates for any religious ceremony are to be set by the Business 

Council of each tribe.

The Council shall have power to appoint all social and dancing 
committees. These committees are to be recognised by the members 
of the tribes. Bach council shall have power to remove any member 
or members of such committees whose conduct is not reflecting credit 
to their respective tribe.

E.  The Business Council, in session, is authorised to formulate under 

the By-laws, such minor rules and orders as may be deemed necessary, 
from time to time, to carry out a good constructive business program.

Section II - Duties of the Tribal Members and Elections:

A.  To uphold and enforce all actions and decisions of the joint Busi

ness Council in all tribal matters. The tribes any voice their 
objections if measures are not acceptable, such as 25% (twenty-five 
per cent) of the qualified voters making a written protest with 
reasons, in which ease the Council must offer such issues for a
vote of the people, according to law.

Any and all members of both tribes are welcome to attend all regular 
Council meetings for their general information as an audience but 
with no voice in the proceedings, except that a member of the tribes 
is given permission by the chairmen of the Council meeting to speak 
not over a period of 15 (fifteen) minutes on any subject under dis
cussion.

The tribal member a have the privilege of contacting numbers of the 
Council on tribal matters when the Council is not in session. A 
Council member my call upon any number of the tribe for information 
at a meeting.

B.  Judges and Clerks of elections are to be appointed by the Business 

Council. The Council shall announce the time of elections and shall 
conduct all elections according to law. Voting shall be by secret 
ballot.

Official election precincts are: Fort Washakie, Wyo., Burris, Wyo., 
Ethete, Wyo., and Arapahoe, Wyoming. Nominations shall be made by 
the Districts as follows: Burris 3, Fort Washakie, 15, Ethete 9, 
and Arapahoe 9.

Qualified voters must be enrolled members of the Shoshone and 
Arapahoe tribes of this reservation and over the age of twenty- 
one years of age.

Primary elections are to be held on the second Monday in October 
previous to general elections for the nominations of candidates for 
election to serve as members of the Business Council. The 12 
(twelve) candidates in each tribe receiving the highest votes in 
the primaries have the nomination as candidates at the general 
election.

General elections will bo held on the second Monday in November, 
beginning on the second Monday in November 1938, and every second 
year thereafter, for the election of new Council members of each 
tribe to serve for a term of two years on the Shoshone and Arapahoe 
Business Council.

Each election precinct shall be presided over by the District 
Farmers of the U. S. Indian Service.

Section III — Business Program and objectives:

A. A. To set up protective measures to guarantee the pursuit of happiness 

and to safeguard the econonic interests of the Shoshone and Arapahoe 
Indians; to protect them in their tribal customs as Indians, and 
to offer such guarantees as to freedom in religious worship that 
might be jeopardized otherwise, due to their segregation as Indians; 
to formulate and introduce plans for social, educational and economic 
programs for the advancement and betterment of living conditions 
affecting the Shoshone and Arapahoe people.

B. Enrollment matters not otherwise cared for by this Constitution 

and By-laws will be dealt with by the general council.

C. To establish a revolving bank fund sufficiently large to take care 

of the needs of those Indians who are anxious to build homes; also, 
to provide reimbursable loans for those needing farming equipment, 
livestock, etc., in order that as many as possible may become self
supporting.

All applicants for reimbursable loans, before they can secure a 
Ioan under this reimbursable plan, must furnish evidence that they 
have fully satisfied all their previous loans.

D. 

Land Acquisition: To make it possible for our landless Indians to 
obtain reimbursable loans from the bank to acquire lands on which 
to build a home and for farming purposes, offering the land so 
purchased as security for the repayment of the loan. No loan for 
this purpose to be in excess of $600.00. It is recommended that 
lands obtained for this purpose be heirship lands wherever possible 
in order to simplify our heirship situation. An heir having an 
interest in a suitable heirship allotment can have first preference 
in buying the allotment under this reimbursable plan if he so 
desires. All proposed purchases must be thoroughly Investigated 
by the Agency officials before the loan is granted.

An equal number of loans are to be granted to each tribe.

If purchaser of this land neglects or refuses to make his pay
ments under his reimbursable agreement and falls behind more than 
a year on said payments, it is recommended that the Government with 
the consent of the Business Council retake the land and improvements 
and turn it over to another landless Indian for the payments due. 
On a maximum loan it is recommended that the reimbursable payments 
extend evenly over a period often (10) years. It is recommended 
that 3% (three per cent) Interest be charged on those loans for 
land purchases in order that a fund be created and that said fund 
so created be used only for the relief of indigent Indians.

In the event of $50,000 revolving reimbursable fund being estab
lished, it is recommended that not over $15,000 be outstanding on 
loan* for acquisition of lands at any one time.

It is further recommended that members of the Business Council pass 
on all applications for reimbursable loans on the reimbursable bank.

E. 

Educational Program: It is proposed that a fund of $5,000 be set 

aside for the purpose of asking reimbursable loans to promising 
young Indians for higher and vocational educational purposes. A 
maximum loan is suggested of $200.00 yearly for any one individual, 
it being understood that those securing this class of loans make re
payment during their summer vacations and upon completion of the 
courses taken.

F. All associations and organisations of a tribal nature are subject 
to the review by/the recommendations of the Business Council.

and

G. 

It is the desire of the Business Council to be informed at all 
times on the leading phases of the Departments of Health, Finance 
and Business, Education and Employment, Welfare, Agriculture, 
Irrigation, Lands and leases, Roads, Industry, Forestry, and CCC-ID, 
and the Law and Order Regulations, on this reservation; and to make 

such recommendations as any be of assistance in the advancement of 
the administration of those various departments, for the benefit of 
the Shoshone and Arapahoe people.

H. 

It shall be the policy of the Business Council to guard carefully 
the tribal right and property; to conserve the natural resources 
of this reservation and to direct their usage along lines of de
velopment and for the greatest good; to retain tribal lands in 
tribal ownership, and to restore to tribal ownership lands that 
have been lost through alienation or sales.

Section IV -- Amendments:

to this Constitution may be proposed by two-third (2/3) 
Amendments 
of the Business Council in joint session, or on the application in 
writing of 25% (twenty-five per cent) of the qualified voters of 
this reservation. A meeting shall be called by the Business Council 
for considering proposed amendments which shall be voted upon by 
the tribes of this reservation. An amendment or amendments shall 
become a valid part of this Constitution when ratified by a spacial 
election called for that purpose or at a general election, both 
upon thirty (30) day notice.

Section V -- By-laws:

This Constitution and By-laws for governing the Indians of the 
Wind River Reservation has been considered and revised as re
quested and is signed below by the committee appointed to draft 
same this twelfth day of April, 1938. It is recommended to our 
respective Councils for adoption.

Signed: 

Irene Meade, Shoshone  Robart Friday, Arapahoe

Lynn St. .Clair, Shoshone Bruce Groesbeck, Arapahoe

Adopted this 27th day of September 1938, by the Shoshone and 
Arapahoe Business Councils in session at Fort Washakie, Wyoming, 
in accordance with notion appearing in the transcript of the minutes.

I, Frances Wallace and R. A. Cramer, clerks of the meeting, attest 
to the correctness of the above instrument as one actually passed 
and adopted by the business councils of the Shoshone and Arapahoe 
Indians.

Subscribed in my presence and sworn to before m at Fort Washakie, 
Wyoming this------- 7th---------day of October.......  1938.

My Commission

Expires Jan. 7, 1939.

