DATE DOWNLOADED: Tue Mar 22 15:24:34 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake Oaks, 
California, with Amendments (1995).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution & Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake Oaks, 
California, with Amendments (1995).

APA 7th ed.
(1995). Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake 
Oaks, California, with Amendments. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake Oaks, 
California, with Amendments. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution & Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake Oaks, 
California, with Amendments (S.I.: s.n., 1995)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake Oaks, 
California, with Amendments (s.n., 1995

MLA 9th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake Oaks, 
California, with Amendments. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, Clearlake Oaks, 
California, with Amendments. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and

Conditions of the license agreement available at 
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.
 
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

FOR THE 
ELEM INDIAN COLONY 
 
 of Pomo Indians  
 

CLEARLAKE OAKS, CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We, the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, to secure greater autonomy, 
and to promote our common welfare, do hereby adopt the following 
constitution and bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians 
of Clearlake Oaks, California
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians shall extend to 
the territory within the present confines of the Elem Indian Colony and 
to such other lands as may hereafter be added thereto.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 The membership of the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians shall consist of:

Section 1. Persons listed on the basic membership roll established 
pursuant to the enrollment ordinance adopted by the general council 
on January 29, 1972.

Section 2. Descendants of persons on the basic membership roll, provided 
such descendants possess at least 1/8 degree Indian blood, and have at 
least one parent who is an enrolled member of the colony.

Section 3. Persons who otherwise meet the requirements for membership as 
established by the above mentioned enrollment ordinance shall be ineligible 
for membership if they:

(a)  are enrolled as members of another tribe or band;

(b)  have received an allotment or formal assignment of land 
with another tribe or band;

(c)  appear on a distribution plan of another tribe or band, 
prepared pursuant to the Amended Rancheria Act.

(c)  have relinquished, in writing, their membership in the
Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians. 

Section 4. The council shall have power to prescribe rules and 
regulations, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering future membership including adoption and loss of membership.
 
 

ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians 
shall be the general council, which shall be composed of all qualified 
voters of the band.

Section 2. All members of the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians who are 
18 years of age or older are qualified voters.

Section 3. The general council shall elect from its members by secret 
ballot an executive committee consisting of a chairman, vice-chairman, 
secretary-treasurer, and two committee members, who shall hold office 
for two years, or until their successors are duly elected, as well as 
such other committees as may be deemed necessary. Duties of the two 
committee members will be as assigned by the general council and the 
chairman.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. The general council shall regularly convene at times and 
places as are prescribed by the executive committee.

Section 2. The executive committee shall call special meetings promptly 
upon receipt of petitions signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of 
the qualified voters requesting such meetings. A majority of the 
qualified voters of the band constitutes a quorum at meetings of the 
general council. Notices of all general council meetings shall be given 
in writing at least fifteen (15) days in advance of the meetings.

Section 3. Special meetings of the executive committee may be called by 
the chairman or the secretary-treasurer when deemed necessary. Three 
members of the executive committee shall constitute a quorum for the 
conduct of its business.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election: Within 60 days following the effective date 
of this constitution and bylaws, the chairman of the general council shall 
call and hold a meeting of the general council for the purpose of electing 
the following officers who shall constitute the executive committee: 
chairman, vice-chairman, secretary-treasurer, and two committee members.

Section 2. Regular Elections: Beginning in 1974, the election of officers 
shall be conducted during November of each even numbered year and all 
officers shall be elected for two (2) year terms, or until their successors 
are duly elected and installed.
 
 

 
 
 Section 3. Nominations of candidates shall occur at the November 
meeting of the general council as provided in Section 2, Article V. 
Nominations shall be from the floor. Any member, who is at least 
18 years of age or older, may be a candidate for office.
 
 

ARTICLE VI  - VACANCIES, REMOVAL AND RECALL

 
 Section 1. Vacancies. If any elective official shall die, resign, 
or shall be found guilty while in office of a felony in any State, 
or Federal court, the executive committee shall declare the position 
vacant and call a special election to fill such vacancy. The 
candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected and 
shall serve out the unexpired term.

Section 2. Recall. Upon receipt by the executive committee of a 
valid petition, signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
qualified voters calling for the recall of an elected officer, the 
executive committee shall call and conduct within thirty (30) days 
a recall election. A majority of those who participate in such 
election must favor recall in order for it to become effective, 
provided those who vote constitute at least fifty-one percent (51%) 
of the qualified voters.

Should the recall be successful, the vacancy shall be filled as 
provided in Section 1 of this article. Further details needed to 
carry out the intent of this article may be set forth in the band’s 
election ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE VII  - POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The general council of the Elea Indian Colony of Pomo 
shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations 
imposed by the statutes and Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with Federal , state and local governments.

(b)  To retain legal counsel, the choice of a fee-charging 
attorney being subject to approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative.

(c)  To veto any proposed sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets of 
the band.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates for federal projects for the benefit of 
the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians prior to the submission 
of such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage, lease, contract, or otherwise deal with tribally 
owned assets.

(f)  To establish fees, receive funds, and expend any such funds 
which may come into the exclusive control of the Elem Indian 
Colony of Porno Indians for the payment of its expenses or to 
finance any project which is for the benefit of the band as a 
whole.

(g)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, consistent with this 
Constitution and bylaws and federal law, governing initial and 
future enrollment for membership, loss of membership, adoption 
of members; the use of tribal land and assets; the conduct of 
elections; the manner of making, holding and revoking assignments 
of tribal land or interests therein; the licensing of non-members 
coming on the rancheria for purposes of hunting, fishing, trading 
or other business; and all other necessary ordinances.

(h)  To establish its own rules of procedure for the conduct of 
its affairs, and to delegate to the executive commi-tee, or 
other representatives, any of the foregoing powers.

(i)  To take such actions as are necessary to carry into effect 
any of the foregoing powers.

(j)  To establish such housing and other authorities as are 
necessary to promote the welfare of the band.

Section 2. The executive committee shall have the following powers, 
but shall not commit the Elem Indian Colony to any contract, lease, or 
other transaction unless it is so authorized in advance by a duly 
enacted ordinance or resolution of the general council.

(a)  Carry out all ordinances, resolutions, or other enactments 
of the general council

(b)  Represent the Elem Indian Colony in all negotiations with 
federal, state and local governments, their agencies and officers, 
and advise the general council of the results of all such 
negotiations.

Section 3. Any rights or powers heretofore vested in the Elem Indian 
Colony of Pomo Indians, but not expressly referred to in this 
constitution, shall not be abridged by this article.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 The protections guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights 
Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 77), against actions of a tribe in exercising 
its powers of self-government, shall apply to the Elem Indian Colony 
of Porno Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters who are eighteen (18) years of age or 
over at an election authorized for that purpose by the Secretary of 
the Interior, provided at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled 
to vote shall vote in such election, but. no amendment shall become 
effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

Section 2. Amendments may be proposed by the executive committee or by 
a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified 
voters of the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians. An amendment will 
be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, who shall thereupon call 
an election upon the proposed language, only after the amendment has 
been discussed and approved at a meeting of the general council.


BYLAWS FOR THE ELEM INDIAN COLONY OF POMO INDIANS 
CLEARLAKE OAKS, CALIFORNIA

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF THE CHAIRMAN


It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside at all meetings of the 
general council and the executive committee; to execute on behalf of 
the Elem Indian Colony all contracts, leases, or other documents when 
authorized to do so by the general council, and to certify the enactment 
of all written resolutions and ordinances. He shall have the general 
supervision of all other officers, committees, and employees, and shall 
see that their duties are properly performed. When neither the general 
council nor the executive committee are in session, he shall be the 
official representative of the Elem Indian Colony. The chairman may 
vote in elections for officers and elections called by the Secretary 
of the Interior, but he shall not vote when presiding at meetings, 
except to break a tie vote.
 
 

ARTICLE II - DUTIES OF THE VICE-CHAIRMAN

 
 It shall be the duty of the vice-chairman to assist the chairman in 
the performance of his duties and in the absence of the chairman to 
perform the duties of the chairman.
 
 

ARTICLE III - DUTIES OF THE SECRETARY-TREASURER

 
 It shall be the duty of the secretary-treasurer to keep the minutes 
of the general council meetings and a record of the executive 
committee meetings; to attest to the enactment of all written 
resolutions and ordinances; to send out all required notices; and 
to receive on behalf of the executive committee all petitions. The 
secretary-treasurer shall have the care and custody of all the funds, 
liquid assets or other valuables of the Elem Indian Colony; shall 
deposit all funds in a depository which has been approved by the 
general council; shall disburse funds only as authorized by resolution 
of the general council by checks which are co-signed by the chairman; 
and shall maintain financial accounts, receipts and records. The 
financial records of the Elem Indian Colony shall be subject to 
inspection or audit at the direction of the general council or the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs. The secretary-treasurer shall report all 
receipts and disbursements at each regular meeting of the general 
council. Whenever the general council deems it necessary, the 
secretary-treasurer shall be. bonded to the Elem Indian Colony, with 
bond premiums payable from the tribal funds. The secretary-treasurer 
will send copies of all minutes of meetings, ordinances and written 
resolutions to the Superintendent, Central California Agency, Bureau 
of Indian Affairs, after approval by the general council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - EFFECTIVE DATE

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the 
qualified voters, voting at an election authorized for that purpose 
by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, 
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for approval, 
and, if approved, shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs on October 19, 1972, under delegated authority, the attached 

constitution and bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, 

Clearlake Oaks, California, was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the colony, and was on February 10, 1973, duly adopted

by a vote of 14 for, and 4 against, in an election in

which at least 30 percent of the 24 entitled to vote cast their

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 

of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 

(49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, William L. Rogers, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the

Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the 

authority granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended, do hereby approve the attached Constitution and Bylaws 

for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians of Clearlake Oaks, 

California.

Approval Recommended:

Washington, D. C.

Date: 

-2 1973

APR 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE

ELEM INDIAN COLONY OF POMO INDIANS 
CLEARLAKE OAKS, CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT I


Line 2, Section 2, Article IV - MEETINGS - shall be amended to 

read as follows:

Forty-five percent (457.) of the qualified voters 
of the band constitutes a quorum at meetings of 
the general council.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area Director, Sacramento 

Area Office on February 11, 1977 the attachment Amendment I

to the Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo 

Indians, Clearlake Oaks, California was submitted to the qualified 

voters of the general council and was on April 16, 1977,

duly adopted by a vote of 17 "for”, and 3 "against",

in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 24 

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of 

the Indian Reorganization Act of Jue 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 738).
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I, William E. Finale Area Director, of the

Sacramento Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue of 

the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the 

Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, delegated to the 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 230 DM 1.1 and redelegated to 

me by 10 BIAM 3 do hereby approve the foregoing Amendment I to 

the Constitution and Bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo 

Indians, Clearlake Oaks, California.

Area Director

Sacramento, California

Date: MAY 18 1977

Tribal Operations 
076.2 Elem Indian Colony

FEB 11 1977

Mr. Richard H. Burcell

Superintendent, Central California Agency

Dear Mr. Burcell:

We have reviewed the resolution adopted by members of the Elem 
Indian Colony asking that we proceed with rules of amendment 
changes, according to their Constitution and Bylaws. Their 
Constitution states that the Secretary of the Interior shall 
call an election upon their proposed language. The resolution 
is in conformity with Article IX of the band’s governing document.

As the document has never been amended, the proposal will be 
numbered Amendment I.

Proposed Amendment I would reduce the quorum required for a 
general meeting from a majority to forty-five percent (45%).

You are hereby authorized to call and conduct the necessary 
election. Voting on the constitutional amendment shall be in 
accordance with 25 CFR 52 as amended. We call your attention 
to 52.109 which provides for registration of voters.

The date of the election shall be set by you in cooperation with 
the community council and shall not be less than 20 days nor more 
than 60 days from the date of posting notices of the election.

Section 52.8 of the regulations provides for an election board 
composed of you, as chairman, and two representatives of the 
council. The election board shall furnish suitable ballots and 
supervise the conduct of the election.

This authorization, unless acted upon within 90 days from the 
date of issue, will be null and void.

The election results should be telephoned to us as soon as they 
become known. If adopted, the original of the proposed amendment 
and the completed Certificate of Results of Election should 
follow by mail for approval; but, they shall not become effective 
until approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(Sgd.) William E. Finale

Area Director

Enclosures

cc: Central California Agency, Tribal Ops.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian

Affairs on October 19, 1972, under delegated authority, the attached 

constitution and bylaws for the Elem Indian Colony of Pomo Indians, 

Clearlake Oaks, California, was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the colony, and was on February 10, 1973, duly adopted

by a vote of 14 for, and 4 against, in an election in

which at least 30 percent of the 24 entitled to vote cast their

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 

of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 

(49 Stat. 378).
 
  
  
 

CENTRAL CALIF AGENCY
RECEIVED

 
 95 JUN 28 PM 9: 54 
 

TRIBAL CAPITAL MEETING 

 
 sign-in sheet

 1995

JUL 28 1995

Mr. Thomas Brown, Chairperson
Elem Indian Colony 
P.0. Box 1968
Clearlake Oaks, California 95423

Dear Mr. Brown:

This letter will serve to provide you with an interpretation from 
the Central California Agency of specific authorities contained, in 
the Elem Indian Colony's Constitution as they pertain to the 
Executive Committee meeting held on June 5, 1995, the General 
Council meeting held on June 24, 1995, and tribal actions taken at 
these meetings.

June 5, 1995, Executive Committee Meeting

Based on our review, it appears the Executive Committee meeting of 
June 5, 1995, was conducted in accordance with the Tribe's 
Constitution and, as such, is considered to be' proper. In 
accordance with the General Council Resolution 95-06-24(C), whereby 
the Elem Indian Colony General Council delegated authority to the 
Executive Committee to enact tribal resolutions on behalf of the 
Tribe, the following comments represent an analysis of Executive 
Committee Resolutions 95-6-5(A), 95-6-5(B), 95-6-5(C), and 95-6- 
5(D).

1. 

Resolution Number 95-6-5(A)

This resolution authorizes the Executive Committee to order 
Thomas Broun and all employees of the Elem Indian Casino and 
the Elem Indian Colony to immediately provide Sarah B. Garcia, 
Tribal Secretary-Treasurer, with all financial records, 

 records of accounts, keys and combinations, and all other 

records and information to ensure that her duties are 
fulfilled in accordance with the duties of the 
secretary/treasurer contained in Article III, of the Tribe's 
Bylaws.

This resolution, as enacted, is in compliance with the 
provisions contained in the Colony's Constitution and Bylaws.

2. 

Resolution Number 95-6-5(B)

This resolution authorizes the Vice-Chairperson to apply for, 
negotiate and execute, a FY 95 Aid to Tribal Government Grant 
in Lieu of Contract and any amendments and revisions thereto.

This resolution, as enacted, appears to be not in compliance 
with the Colony's Constitution and Bylaws.

3. 

Resolution Number 95-6-5(C)

This resolution authorizes the Vice-Chairperson to apply for, 
negotiate and execute the Tribe's FY 94 ATTG Grant and any 
amendments and revisions thereto.

This resolution, as enacted, appears to be not in compliance 
with the Colony's Constitution and Bylaws.

4. 

Resolution Number 95-6-5(D)

This resolution authorizes the Vice-Chairperson to enter into 
a memorandum of agreement with the Northern California Indian 
Development Council and to apply for, negotiate and execute 
the Tribe's FY 95 Community Service Block Grant and any 
amendments and revisions thereto.

This resolution, as enacted, appears to be not in compliance 
with the Colony's Constitution and Bylaws.

June 24, 1995, General Council Meeting

It appears that this meeting was duly called. Adequate notice was 
provided to all eligible voters and a quorum was present, 
therefore, these facts, as confirmed, indicate this meeting was 
conducted in accordance with the Colony's Constitution and Bylaws.

The following represents an analysis of General Counci1 resolutions 
95-6-24(A), 95-6-24(B), and 95-6-24(C).

1. 

Resolution Number 95-6-24(A)

This resolution authorizes and directs the Secretary-Treasurer 
to take whatever steps are necessary to provide the General 
Council with an audit on all financial records of the Elem 
Indian Colony.

This resolution appears to be in compliance with the Colony's 
Constitution and Bylaws.

2. 

Resolution Number 95-6-24(B)

This resolution directs the Executive Committee, through the 
Vice-Chairperson or any duly elected successor to her office, 
to do all things necessary to enforce Executive Committee 
Resolution 95-6-5(A) against any person or entity found by 
resolution of the Executive Committee to be in violation of 
it.

This resolution further directs the Vice-Chairperson, through 
the use of the services of the Tribe's Attorney, to file a 
lawsuit in the appropriate jurisdiction against Thomas Brown 
and all persons who are in violation of Executive Committee 
Resolution 95-6-5(A).

This resolution deals directly with the internal disputes and, 
as such, the Central California Agency cannot address this 
resolution.

3. 

Resolution Number 95-6-24(C)

This resolution delegates authority to the Executive Committee 
to enact tribal resolutions.

This resolution, as enacted, appears to be in compliance with 
the Colony's Constitution and Bylaws.

If you have any questions in this matter, please contact Hr. 
Raymond Fry, Tribal Operations Officer at (916) 566-7124.

Sincerely,

/S/ Carol Rogers-Davis
 
 

FOR

 
 Harold H. Brafford
Superintendent

cc: Ms. Mabel Fourkiller, Vice-Chairperson 

Ms. Sarah Garcia, Secretary-Treasurer 
Ms. Myrtle Steward, Member At Large 
Ms. Lorretta Kelsey, Member At Large 
3703-P3 Elem Indian Colony
Tribal Operations Chron.
Superintendents Chron.
 
 

ELEM INDIAN COLONY

GENERAL COUNCIL RESOLUTION

 
 References:

NUMBER 95-06 24 (C) 
Executive Committee to enact Resolutions

WHEREAS, Elem Indian Colony is a soveriegn Tribe, recognized by 

the Department of Interior, Bureau of Indian Affairs; 
and

WHEREAS, The General Council is the governing body of the Elem 

Indian Colony, Clearlake Oaks, California; and

WHEREAS, In accordance with the Elem Constitution, ARTICLE VII, 

POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY, Section 1 (h); "To 
establish its own rules of procedure for the conduct
of its affairs, and to delegate to the executive 
committee, or other representative, any of the fore
going powers"; and

WHEREAS, The General Council deems it necessary for the Elem 

Executive Committee to enact tribal resolutions for

all grant, continuing programs, meetings, memberships
of the BIA and all other entities, including all 
responsibilities and authorities imposed on the 
executive committee by the general council; now

THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED, That the General Council of the Elem 
Indian Colony, empower the Executive Committee to enact Tribal 
Resolutions.

It is hereby certified that a duly called and convened meeting 
of the Elem Indian Colony, General Council, held on June 24,
1995, with a quorum present this Resolution was approved by a
vote of 36/FOR, 0/AGAINST, and 0/ABSTAINING.

MABLE E. FOURKILLER, VICE-CHAIRPERSON

DATE:

ATTEST:

SARAH B. GARCIA, SECRETARY/TREASURER

DATE:

Digitized from Best Copy Available
 
 

 
 
 