 
  
 Approved: 1994 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Indians of the Elk Valley Rancheria, located near the town of Crescent City, 
Del Norte County, California, in order to form a recognized representative 
organization to manage all tribal affairs; to preserve and make secure our tribal 
homeland, heritage and identity; to safeguard our interests and general welfare; to 
improve the economic conditions of ourselves and our Rancheria; do here approve 
and adopt this Constitution pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 
1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.
 
 

ARTICLE I - PURPOSE

 
 The Indians of the Elk Valley Rancheria, hereinafter referred to as the "Tribe", 
pursuant to the Act of June 18, 1934, and the judgment entered in Hardwick v 
United States of America, U.S. District for the Northern District of California, No. C- 
79-1710-SW, do hereby adopt this Constitution which shall henceforth constitute 
the governing document of the Tribe, for the purpose of governing ourselves, to 
promote and protect the interests of the Tribe, and to enhance peaceful and 
cooperative relations with other tribal, Federal, State, and local government(s) and 
other entities.
 
 

ARTICLE II -TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Elk Valley Rancheria shall extend to the territory within the 
boundaries of the Elk Valley Rancheria, as established in the judgment entered in 
Hardwick v. United States of America, U.S. District for the Northern District of 
California, No. C-79-171O-SW, and to such other lands as may be hereafter acquired 
by or for the Tribe within or without said boundary lines. The jurisdiction of the Elk 
Valley Rancheria shall also extend to affiliated Indian country which is located 
contiguous to the Elk Valley Rancheria or other lands acquired by or for the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Membership. The membership of the Elk Valley Rancheria shall consist of 
the following:

(a) All persons whose names are listed as distributee on the Plan for the 
Distribution of Assets of the Elk Valley Rancheria approved by the secretary of the 
Interior on January 15, 1960, pursuant to the California Rancheria Act of August 18, 
1958 as amended. The list of distributees contained in the Distribution Plan shall 
constitute the base membership roll of the Rancheria.

(b) Descendants of persons whose names are listed on the base membership roll, 
Provided That he/she possesses at least one-eighth degree or more Indian blood.

(c) All children born after the adoption of this constitution to any member who are 
one-eighth degree or more Indian blood.

Section 2. Dual Membership Prohibited. No person shall be eligible to be a member 
of the Elk Valley Rancheria if that person is enrolled in another federally recognized 
Indian tribe. Any member of the Elk Valley Indian Rancheria who applies to be and 
is accepted as a member of another federally recognized tribe shall be subject to 

disenrollment and the forfeiture of all rights and benefits to which Elk Valley 
Rancheria tribal members are entitled by virtue of their membership.

Section 3. Regulation of Membership. The Tribal Council shall have the power to 
enact ordinances, consistent with this constitution and applicable Federal law, 
governing future membership, including application and appeal procedures, loss of 
membership, and adoption of members. Said ordinance shall provide for 
preparation and maintenance of an official membership roll and an enrollment 
committee.

Section 4. Relinquishment of Membership. Any person who wishes to relinquish 
membership in the Elk Valley Rancheria must submit such relinquishment in 
writing to the Tribal Council Chairperson who shall cause tribal enrollment records 
to be adjusted accordingly. However, any member who voluntarily relinquishes 
membership shall not again be eligible to enroll as a member of the Elk Valley 
Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Tribe shall be the Elk Valley Tribal Council. It 
shall be the duty of the Tribal Council to govern all the people, resources, land, and 
water reserved to the Tribe in accordance with this Constitution, and under such 
laws as may hereinafter be adopted by the Tribal Council.

Section 2. Composition. The Tribal Council shall consist of a Chairperson, Vice- 
Chairperson, Secretary, Treasurer and five (5) additional Council persons elected by 
secret ballot of the eligible voters of the Rancheria. Except as provided in Article IX 

herein, each Tribal Council member shall serve for a term of four (4) years. 
Selection of Council officers shall occur pursuant to an election ordinance which 
may authorize at large election by officers. In the absence of such ordinance, 
officers shall be selected by the Council from its membership, following each 
election.

Section 3. Bonding. The Tribal Council shall require all fiscally responsible tribal 
officials and employees to be bonded.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The Tribal Council shall exercise all the powers and 
responsibilities provided under the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended, and such powers and responsibilities hereinafter provided 
subject to any limitations imposed by Federal law and this Constitution.
(a) To consult, negotiate, contract, or conclude agreements with Federal, State, 
local and tribal governments and with private persons and organizations;

(b) To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior so long as such approval is required by 
Federal law;

(c) To make recommendations to the Secretary of the Interior, or to his authorized 
representative, with regard to all appropriation estimates for all projects which are 
for the benefit of the members of the Tribe, prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the office of Management and Budget and Congress;

(d) To borrow money from public and private sources and to pledge, mortgage or 
assign tribal assets other than real property and tribal assets form which income is 
derived and which is held in trust by the United States of America;

(e) To set aside and to expend tribal funds for tribal purposes;

(f) To impose taxes, fees and assessments on all persons, property and any business 
activities located or conducted within tribal jurisdiction; Provided, no tax shall be 
imposed on real property held in trust by the United States of America;

(g) To charter and regulate corporations, cooperatives, associations, special 
districts, housing authorities; educational and charitable institutions, political 
subdivisions and other entities;

(h) To license and regulate the conduct of all business activities within tribal 
jurisdiction;

(i) To establish enterprises as branches or agencies of the tribal government, and 
otherwise to engage in business activities and projects which promote the 
economic well-being of the Tribe and its members.

(j) To purchase and to acquire in other ways land and property;

(k) To manage, develop, protect and regulate the use of water, minerals, and all 
other natural resources within tribal jurisdiction;

(l) To enact laws and codes governing the conduct of individuals and prescribing 
disciplinary action or offenses against the Tribe; to maintain order; to protect the 
safety and welfare of all persons within tribal jurisdiction; and to provide for the 
enforcement of the laws and codes of the Tribe;

(m) To establish tribal courts and administrative bodies, and to provide for the 
courts' jurisdiction, procedures, and a method for the selection of judges; to seek 
retrocession of jurisdiction from the State of California;

(n) To assert as a defense to lawsuits against the Tribe the sovereign immunity of 
the Tribe;

(o) To regulate domestic relations; to provide services for the health, education and 
welfare of all persons within tribal jurisdiction; to reassume jurisdiction and 
regulate child welfare proceedings as provided by the Indian Child Welfare Act of 
1978 (P.L. 95-608);

(p) To appoint, direct and set the compensation of all tribal Business Administrators 
or Managers and other tribal employees and to establish policies and procedures 
for the employment of tribal personnel;

(q) Subject to any limitations contained in this Constitution, to delegate any of the 
foregoing powers vested in the Tribal Council to subordinate boards or 
committees, tribal officers, or tribal agents; and

(r) To take all actions which are necessary and proper for the exercise of the 
powers delegated to the Tribal Council or to any person or committee under the 
supervision of the Tribal Council.

Section 2. All rights, powers and authorities expressed, implied, or otherwise vested 
in the Tribe not expressly referred to in these articles, shall not be hereby abridged 
but shall exercised by the Tribal Council through the adoption of appropriate 
amendments to this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL COUNCIL OPERATIONS

 
 Section 1. Tribal Council Meetings. All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be open 
to all tribal members, Provided, However, That the Council may recess to discuss 
any matter involving litigation or the privacy of an individual member in a closed or 
executive session if the general subject matter to be discussed is expressed in the 
motion calling for such session and no final action is taken in the closed or 
executive session. Except as provided by this Constitution or other laws of the Elk 
Valley Rancheria, all meetings of the Tribal Council shall be conducted in 
accordance with Robert's Rules of Order. Meetings shall be held in accordance with 
the following provisions:

(a)  Frequency. Regular monthly meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held on the 
Elk Valley Rancheria as designated by a resolution. The Tribal Council may set more 
frequent regular meetings as are necessary.

(b) Quorum. The Tribal Council quorum is hereby established as five (5) Council 
members.

(c) Voting. Each member of the Tribal Council shall have one (1) vote; the 
Chairperson may vote only in case of a tie on all matters.

(d)  Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the 
Chairperson, and shall be called when requested by a majority of the Tribal Council, 
or upon written request of a majority of eligible voting members of the tribe.
Reasonable notice shall be given in regard to any special meetings, and shall specify 
the purpose of the meeting. Emergency meetings may be provided for in a Tribal 
Council resolution.

(e) Misconduct. Any Council member or persons of the General council displaying 
actions of misconduct at any meetings shall, upon majority vote of the Tribal 
Council, be ejected from the meeting.

Section 2: Retention of Tribal Enactments and Other Records. Copies of all statutes, 
codes, resolutions and ordinances by the Tribal Council, its committees and 
subcommittees shall be maintained at the tribal office, and shall be available for 
inspection upon reasonable notice during regular business hours to all enrolled 
members of the Tribe.

Master copies of all records and other papers relating to the conduct of tribal 
business shall be maintained at all times at the tribal office and shall not be 
removed except pursuant to an ordinance governing the maintenance and 
archiving of tribal records. Additional copies shall be made as necessary for 
distribution to council members or as needed for the regular conduct of business 
by the Tribe, its officers, agents and employees.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chairperson. The Chairperson shall exercise the following powers as the 
chief executive officer of the tribe:

(a) To preside over and vote in cases of a tie vote at all meetings of the Tribal 
Council and General Council.

(b) Subject to the approval of the Tribal Council, to establish such boards, 
committees, or subcommittees as the business of the Tribal Council may require, 
and to serve as an ex-officio member of all such committees and boards;

(c) Subject to the approval of all contracts by the Tribal Council, to serve as a 
contracting officer or agent for the Tribe including authority to retain legal 
counsel;

(d)  Subject to such regulations and procedures as may be prescribed by enactment 
by the Tribal Council, and subject to approval by the Tribal Council, to grant 
pardons or restore tribal members to eligibility for elective office in tribal 
government or to eligibility for other tribal benefits;

(e) The Chairperson shall not hold other tribal offices or engage in private 
remunerative employment which may pose a conflict of interest with the tribe's 
enterprises or business activities during his/her term of office.

Section 2. The Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall, in the absence or 
incapacity of the Chairperson, perform all duties and assume all the responsibilities 
vested in the Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall, upon request of the Council, 
assist in carrying out the duties of the Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall 
perform any other duties of the Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall perform 
any other duties as the Council may direct.

Section 3. Secretary. The Secretary shall call the roll; handle all official 
correspondence of the Tribal Council; keep the minutes of all regular and special 
meetings of the Tribal Council and General Council; certify to the Superintendent 
of the Bureau of Indian Affairs the duly elected officers of the Tribal Council within 
fifteen (15) days of the date of any election; and attest to all resolutions and 
ordinances.

Section 4. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall accept, receipt for, keep and safeguard all 
funds under the exclusive control of the Tribe by depositing them in a bank insured 
by an agency of the Federal Government, or an appropriate account or tribal trust 
account with the Bureau of Indian Affairs, as directed by the Tribal Council, and 
shall keep or cause to be kept an accurate record of such funds and shall report on 
all receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds in the custody 
of the Tribal Council except as directed by the Tribal Council.

The Treasurer shall be required to give a surety bond satisfactory to the Tribal 
Council, and the Tribal Council shall be responsible for the costs.

All checks drawn on tribal funds shall be signed, and all vouchers shall be approved 
for payment by the Treasurer, or at least one officer, or the designated check 
signers of the Tribe, in accordance with a written fiscal manual setting forth a 
procedure approved and adopted by the Tribal Council by resolution.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Tribe shall be accorded by the governing body equal 
rights, equal protection, and equal opportunities to participate in the economic 
resources and activities of the Tribe, and no member shall be denied any of the 
rights and guarantees set forth in the Indian Civil Rights Act of April 1, 1968 (82 Stat. 
77) including but not limited to freedom of religion and conscience, freedom of 

speech, the right to orderly association or assembly, the right to petition for action 
of the redress of grievances, and due process of law.

Section 2. Annual General Membership Meeting. The general membership of the 
Tribe shall meet at least once every year on or before the Elk Valley Rancheria, the 
time, date and location to be established by the Council.

a.  Notice: At least thirty (30) days prior to the date of the annual meeting, written 
notice of the meeting and the agenda for the meeting shall be posted at the tribal 
office setting forth the date, time and place that the annual meeting will be held.

b. Tribal Council Attendance. All members of the Tribal Council shall attend all 
general membership meetings and report on those items on the agenda. Failure of 
any council member to attend a general membership meeting, Except for travel on 
tribal business, illness, the death or illness of a member of the council member's 
immediate family, shall be grounds for removal. (Immediate family shall mean 
father, mother, brother, sister, spouse, child, grandparent or grandchild.)

c.  Duties of the Tribal Council. The Chairperson shall preside over the meeting of 
the general membership The Council shall prepare at least thirty (30) days before 
the general membership meeting an agenda for the meeting. The items on the 
agenda shall include but not be limited to a written report by the Treasurer on the 
finances of the tribal government; the names of persons enrolled, disenrolled or 
who relinquished membership during the fiscal year immediately preceding the 
meeting; status of litigation to which the Tribe is a party; a written report by the 
Chairperson on all enactments of the Tribal Council during the year immediately 
preceding the meeting with a short summary explaining each law.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Tribal Council Election. The first election under this Constitution shall be 
held within ninety (90) days of the effective date of this Constitution at which time 
a system of staggered terms shall be established pursuant to the requirements of 

this Constitution. Elections shall be held by secret ballot. The five (5) members 
receiving the highest number of votes in the first election shall hold office for a 
period of four (4) years and the four (4) remaining members shall hold office for a 
period of two (2) years. Thereafter, all the terms of office shall be for a period of 
four (4) years. Council members shall hold office until their successors are duly 
elected and installed. Installation of newly elected officers shall occur at the next 
regularly scheduled council meeting following the election.

Section 2. Qualifications. Any enrolled member eighteen (18) years or more of age 
shall be eligible to vote in tribal elections. Any enrolled member eighteen (18) years 
or more of age shall be eligible for election to the Tribal Council, Provided, That any 
person who has been convicted of a crime involving moral turpitude or an offense 
against the Tribe or its agents or employees while serving in their official capacities, 
and who has completed any sentence/probation or parole within the five years 
preceding the election shall be ineligible to hold office on the Tribal Council; 
Provided, Further That any person against whom the Tribe has obtained a civil 
judgment and the judgment is outstanding or was paid in full within the five years 
preceding the election shall be ineligible to hold office on the Tribal Council.

Section 3. Vacancies and Removal From Office. If a Council member or official 
member shall die, resign, be removed or recalled from office, be found guilty of a 
felony or a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, the Tribal Council shall declare 
the position vacant and shall appoint a qualified member of the Tribe to fill the 
unexpired term.

The Tribal Council may by a majority vote expel any member for neglect of duty or 
gross misconduct. Neglect of duty shall include, but not be limited to unexcused 
absence form three consecutive regularly scheduled council meetings. Before any 
vote for expulsion is taken, such a member or official shall be given a written 
statement of the charges against him or her at least five (5) days before the meeting 
of the Tribal Council at which the matter of expulsion is to be decided, and the 
accused shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all charges at the Tribal 
Council meeting.

Section 4. Election Day. Elections shall be held as designated by an election 
ordinance as provided in Section 5 of this Article.

Section 5. Election Ordinance. The Tribal Council shall adopt an election ordinance 
consistent with this Constitution within six (6) months of the effective date of this 
Constitution which shall set forth the procedures to be followed in conducting 
elections called for in this Constitution. The ordinance shall include provisions for 
conducting all tribal elections by secret ballot, rules for calling elections, absentee 
balloting procedures, procedures for nominations, voter registration, maintenance 
of an eligible voter's list, the form of ballot, establishment of polling places, 
selection of election officials, validation of petitions and resolution of election 
disputes.
 
 

ARTICLE X - POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. Referendum. The Tribal Council shall, upon receipt of a petition signed by 
thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters, submit any enacted or proposed tribal 
legislation to a referendum of the eligible voters. The decision of a majority (51%) of 
the voters voting in the referendum shall be final, Provided, That thirty percent 
(30%) of the qualified voters voted. The Tribal Council shall call the referendum 
within thirty (30) days from the date of the receipt of a valid petition.

Section 2. Initiative. The qualified voters of the Tribe reserve the power to 
independently propose tribal legislation. Any proposed initiative measure shall be 
presented to the Tribal Council accompanied by a petition signed by not less than 
thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters. Upon receipt of such a petition, the 
Tribal Council shall call a special election for the purpose of allowing the members 

of the Tribe to vote on the initiative measure. The election shall be held within 
thirty (30) days from the date a valid petition is presented. The decision of a 
majority shall be final, Provided, That thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters 
voted.

Section 3. Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) 
of the qualified voters of the Tribe demanding a recall of any member of the Tribal 
Council, it shall be the duty of the Tribal Council to call a special election on the 
question of the recall. The election shall be held in a manner prescribed in a duly 
adopted election ordinance. The decision of a majority (51%) of the voters voting in 
the recall shall be final, Provided, That at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified 
voters voted.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this constitution shall in the future be declared invalid by a court 
of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision/provisions shall be severed and the 
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - INTERIM TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Council Operation. Until such time as this Constitution is approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior as set forth in Article XIV, Tribal Council elected by 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Elk Valley Rancheria voting at an election 

called for that purpose shall govern in accordance with provisions of this 
Constitution.

Section 2. Savings Clause. All enactments of the Interim Tribal Council made prior 
to approval of this Constitution by the Secretary of the Interior, and not 
inconsistent with this Constitution or Federal law, shall be ratified upon adoption of 
this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of Elk 
Valley Rancheria, voting at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of 
the Interior, Provided, That at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election. No amendment shall become effective until approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call for such an election or 
referendum on any proposed amendment at the request of a majority of the Tribal 
Council, or upon presentation of a petition proposing an amendment signed by at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters of the Elk valley Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - APPROVAL

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Elk 
Valley Rancheria voting at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of 
the Interior in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall 

vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his/her approval, and 
shall be effective from the date of his or her approval.

