DATE DOWNLOADED: Tue Mar 22 18:31:32 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution (1996).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution (1996).

APA 7th ed.
(1996). Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution (S.I.: s.n., 1996)

AGLC 4th ed.
Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution (s.n., 1996

MLA 9th ed.
Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Estom Yumeka Maidu Enterprise Rancheria Tribal Constitution. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.
 
 

ESTOM YUMEKA MAIDU 

ENTERPRISE RANCHERIA

TRIBAL CONSTITUTION

 
 Constitution 

of the 

Enterprise Rancheria

Adopted: 

May 05, 1996

Table of Contents

Preamble
Article I Territory
Article II Membership

Section 1.  Eligible Members
Section 2.  Application for Membership
Section 3. 
Section 4.  Relinquishment
Section 5.  Enrollment Ordinance
Section 6.  Disenrollment

Ineligible Individuals

Article III Governing Body

Section 1.  General Council
Section 2.  Tribal Council

Article IV Elections

Section 1.  First Tribal Council Election & Terms of Office
Section 2.  Eligible Voters & Council Member Requirements
Section 3.  Candidacy for Tribal Council
Section 4.  Election Ordinance
Section 5.  Elections Board
Section 6.  Members of the Elections Board
Article V Vacancies, Removal and Recall of Tribal Council 

Section 1. Vacancy
Section 2.  Removal
Section 3.  Recall of Tribal Council Members
Section 4.  Recall of Election Board Members
Article VI Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council 

Section 1. Explicit Powers
Section 2.  General Powers.

Article VII Meetings

Section 1. 
Section 2.  General Council Meetings

Tribal Council Meetings

Article VIII Duties of Officers

Section 1.  Chairperson
Section 2.  Vice-Chairperson
Secretary
Section 3. 
Section 4.  Treasurer
Section 5.  Appointed Officers and Committees
Section 6.  Oath of Office
Section 7.  Attendance at General Council Meetings

Article IX Referendum

Section 1. 
Section 2.  Limitations on Referendum

Power

Article X Judicial System
Section 1. 
Section 2. 

Judicial Capacity
Judicial Powers

Article XI Severability
Article XII Amendment

Section 1.  Calling an Election to Amend the Constitution
Section 2.  Notice of Election
Section 3.  Quorum for Election

Article XIII Ratification
Certification

1
 
 
I

 
 1
1
2
2
2
3

3
3

4
4
4
5 
5
5

6
6
6
7

7
9

10
11

12
14
14
15
16
16
16

17
17

18
18
18

19
19
19
19
20

Constitution 
of the 
Enterprise Rancheria

Preamble

The Estom Yumeka Maidu of the Enterprise Rancheria, hereinafter referred to as the 

"Tribe", hereby adopt this Constitution to establish a tribal government through which we 

may effectively exercise our inherent sovereign powers and privileges, and to preserve and 

maintain our unique cultural and ethnic heritage.

Article I — Territory

The territ orial jurisdiction of the Tribe shall extend to all lands to which the Tribe has 

historic, legal or beneficial title, or may acquire in the future.

Article II — Membership

Section 1. Eligible Members

Eligible members consist of the individuals who were listed on any official U.S. 

Government roll of Maidu Indians from the Feather River Drainage Area, including, but 

not limited to, the BIA roll of Maidu Indians dated April 20, 1915, as well as the direct 

lineal descendants of such individuals.

Section 2. Application for Membership

Except for individuals listed on the BIA roll of Maidu Indians dated April 20, 1915, all 

eligible members shall apply for membership, and shall be subject to the approval 

procedures for membership, as set out in the enrollment ordinance described in Section 6.

Section 3. Ineligible Individuals

Any person who is officially enrolled with or has received an assignment or allotment of 

land on the reservation of another federally-recognized tribe or who has relinquished his or 

her membership in the Enterprise Rancheria pursuant to Section 4, below, shall not be 

eligible for membership in the Enterprise Rancheria; except that:

(a) 

interests in tribally assigned or individually allotted land acquired by gift, devise 

or inheritance shall not be considered grounds for ineligibility; and

(b) 

a person who is officially enrolled with another federally-recognized tribe may be 

officially enrolled with the Tribe after he/she has executed a written 

relinquishment of his/her membership in the other federally recognized tribe.

Section 4. Relinquishment

Any adult member may relinquish his or her membership in the Tribe, and the membership 

of his or her minor children, in writing. Any member who relinquishes his or her 

membership after reaching the age of adulthood shall no longer be eligible to be a member 

of the Tribe.

Section 5. Enrollment Ordinance

Enrollment of members after ratification of this Constitution shall be prepared under the 

purview of the enrollment ordinance adopted by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the 

Tribal Council This ordinance shall include, but need not be limited to. provisions for 

enrollment procedures, an enrollment committee, application forms, approval and 

disapproval of applications, rejection notices, appeals, corrections, disenrollment 

procedures and provisions for keeping the roll current.

Section 6. Disenrollment

Disenrollment of members shall be conducted under procedures described in the 

Enrollment Ordinance, within the following guidelines: 1) Only the General Council may 

disenroll a member of the Tribe. 2) Disenrollment shall be ordered by the General Council 

only after holding a duly called and noticed General Council meeting where a three- 

quarters (3/4) majority of those present votes in favor of disenrollment, 3) Disenrollment 

is limited to members who have been either convicted of a violent felony or who have 

acted in a willfill and malicious manner that might cause or has caused serious damage to 

the Tribe, 4) The member, who could be disenrolled, shall receive at least thirty (30) days 

written notice of the charges against him/her and a description of the allegations which 

support disenrollment, and 5) The member, who could be disenrolled, shall have the right 

to a fair hearing including, but not limited to, the right to face his or her accusers in the 

General Council meeting.

Article III — Governing Body

Section 1. General Council

The General Council shall consist of enrolled members of the Tribe who are eighteen (18) 

years of age or older and who are either listed on the BIA roll of Maidu Indians dated 

April 20, 1915, or are the direct lineal descendants of such individuals.. The General 

Council may exercise its powers through referendum, amendment of this Constitution, any 

powers provided to the General Council in this Constitution, and such other powers as 

may be reserved to it by this Constitution.

Section 2. Tribal Council

The governing body of the Tribe shall be the Tribal Council, which shall consist of seven 

(7) enrolled Members elected by the General Council The Tribal Council shall elect its 

own officers from the members of the Tribal Council These officers shall be Chairperson, 

Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer.

Article IV - Elections

Section 1. First Tribal Council Election & Terms of Office

The first election of the Tribal Council under this Constitution shall be held within ninety 

(90) days after the date on which this Constitution is adopted. At that election, the four 

candidates who receive the most votes shall be elected for four (4) year terms while the 

next three candidates shall be elected for two (2) year terms. Thereafter, all terms of 

office shaft be for four (4) years, with the second election taking place approximately two 

(2) years into the future during the month of January, Thereafter elections shall be held 

every two (2) years on a staggered basis during the month of January.

Section 2. Eligible Voters & Tribal Council Member Requirements

All members of the General Council at the time of the election shall be eligible to vote.

Any General Council Member who has been convicted of a violent felony or 

embezzlement shall not be eligible to serve on the Tribal Council for at least twenty-five 

(25) years after the felony conviction; and anybody convicted of any other type of felony 

shall not be eligible to serve on the Tribal Council for at least ten (10) years after the 

felony conviction.

Section 3. Candidacy for Tribal Council

Any member of the General Council may announce his/her candidacy for Tribal Council in 

writing no later than thirty (30) days prior to the election. The list of candidates shall be 

announced publicly at the regular Tribal Council meeting immediately preceding the 

election, which shall be a least two (2) weeks and no more than thirty (30) days before the 

election. The list of candidates shall be posted that same day at the tribal office or such 

other place or places designated by the General Council in an election ordinance. If the 

number of eligible candidates is less than the number of available seats on the Tribal 

Council, the Tribal Council shall fill the vacancy, after the election, under Section 1 of 

Article V.

Section 4. Election Ordinance

The Tribal Council shall enact an Election Ordinance prescribing procedures for fair 

elections to the Tribal Council, absentee balloting, voter registration, settlement of 

election disputes, handling of petitions and the conduct of referendum and recall elections, 

and elections to amend the Election Ordinance and this Constitution. All elections shall be 

conducted by secret ballot. Only the General Council may amend the Election Ordinance.

Section 5. Elections Board

All elections, to the Tribal Council, shall be supervised and conducted by an Elections 

Board. The Elections Board shall be comprised of three (3) members of the General 

Council, who have not been convicted of a felony, who are not members of the Tribal 

Council, and who are not candidates for the Tribal Council

Section 6. Members of the Elections Board

At the first General Council meeting following the adoption of this Constitution and at 

General Council meetings, as described in Article VII, Section 2 (a), the General Council 

shall elect members of the General Council to the Election Board by secret ballot. Such 

elections shall occur when the terms of current members of the Election Board end or 

vacancies otherwise occur. The initial terms of office for the two (2) members of the 

Elections Board who receive the highest number of votes shall expire at the next General 

Council meeting which is at least four (4) years after the Board members’ election. The 

initial term of office for the remaining Board member shall expire at the next General 

Council meeting which is at least two (2) years after the Board member’s election. In the 

event of a tie, the winner shall be determined by chance. After the terms of the initial three 

members of the Elections Board have expired, the terms of office of all Elections Board 

members shall be four (4) years, with elections staggered every two years.

Article V - Vacancies, Removal and Recall of Tribal Council

Section 1.  Vacancy

If a member of the Tribal Council dies, resigns, or is absent from three (3) consecutive 

regular Tribal Council meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the Tribal Council shall 

declare the position vacant. If less than two (2) years remains in that member’s term, then 

the Tribal Council shall, by a majority vote, fill the vacancy by electing a member of the 

General Council to serve remainder of the term. If two (2) or more years remain in the 

term of a vacant Tribal Council Council seat, then the Tribal Council shall elect a 

temporary Tribal Council Member, pursuant to the procedures described in the previous . 

sentence, who shall hold that position until the next regularly - scheduled election.

Section 2.  Removal

If a member of the Tribal Council is convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a 

felony while in office, or if a Tribal Council member is determined, based upon a 

preponderance of the evidence presented at a duly noticed meeting at which that member 

is given a fair and reasonable opportunity to be heard, to have committed acts which are 

contrary to the best interests of the Tribe or otherwise to have abused the powers or 

privileges of his/her office, the Tribal Council may declare the position vacant by a three 

quarters (3/4) majority vote of the members of the Tribal Council The member whose 

position is the subject of the vote may not vote.

Section 3.  Recall of Tribal Council Members

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the General Council 

demanding the recall of any members) of the Tribal Council and setting forth specific 

reasons for such recall, the Elections Board shall call a special General Council election on 

the question of the recall within thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the valid 

petition with the Elections Board. If the Elections Board does not call the General 

Council special election to address the recall petition, then the spokesperson for the recall 

petition may call and chair the General Council meeting consistent with the notice 

requirements in Article VII, Section 2, b. The election shall be held in the manner 

prescribed in the Tribe’s Election Ordinance. The decision of a majority of the voters 

voting in the recall election shall be final, provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of 

the General Council voted in the election.

Section 4.  Recall of Elections Board Members

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the General Council 

demanding the recall of any members) of the Elections Board and setting forth specific

 reasons for such recall, the Tribal Council shall call a special General Council election on 

the question of the recall within thirty (30) days from the date of the filing of the valid 

petition with the Tribal Council If the Tribal Council does not call the General Council 

special election to address the recall petition, then the spokesperson for the recall petition 

may call and chair the General Council meeting consistent with the notice requirements in 

Article VII, Section 2, b. The election shall be held in the manner prescribed in the Tribe’s 

Election Ordinance. The decision of a majority of the voters voting in the recall election 

shall be final, provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the General Council voted 

in the election.

Article VI — Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council

Section 1.  Explicit Powers

The Tribal Council shall exercise the following powers and responsibilities subject only to 
those limitations imposed by this Constitution and applicable federal law.

(a) 

To negotiate contracts or conclude agreements with Federal, State, Local and 

Tribal governments, private entities and individuals on behalf of the Tribe; to 

consult with the United States Government on all activities of all agencies of the 

United States which might affect the Tribe; and to advise the Secretary of the 
Interior and other federal officials on all federal projects for the benefit of the 
Tribe.

(b) 

To promote the health, education and general welfare of the members of the Tribe 

and to administer charity and such other services as may contribute to the social 

and economic advancement of the Tribe and its members.

(c) 

To encourage, foster and protect the traditions and the culture of the Tribe.

(d) 

To develop and enforce resolutions and ordinances providing for the manner of 

making, holding and revoking assignments of tribal lands, providing for the 

levying of taxes and fees and the appropriation of available Tribal funds for public 

and other lawful purposes; providing for the licensing of businesses and other

 activities by any and all persons subject to the Tribe’s jurisdiction; providing for 

the exclusion of persons from Tribal lands; and on such other subjects as the 

activities of the Tribe may require that are not inconsistent with this Constitution.

(e) 

To borrow money and provide for the repayment thereof manage all economic 

affairs and enterprises, create Tribally-owned and/or chartered corporations or 

other business entities and employ and discharge employees.

(f) 

To manage, protect and preserve all lands, minerals, wildlife and other natural 

resources of the Tribe; or to initiate and administer land development projects for 

the Tribe on tribal lands. Notwithstanding the foregoing, acts to initiate or 

approve any acquisition, disposition, lease, encumbrance or condemnation of 

tribal lands or property or to pledge newly purchased lands as security for loans 

on such lands requires a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the full Tribal Council

(g) 

To create and maintain a tribal fund for administrative expenses of the Tribe and 

to provide for salaries or wages for Tribal Council members and tribal officials as 

may be required; to administer any funds or property within the control of the 

Tribe for the benefit of the Tribe and its members, officers, or employees; and to 

allocate tribal funds as loans or grants and to transfer tribal property and other 

assets to tribal organizations for such use as the Tribal Council may determine to 

be appropriate.

(h) To choose and employ legal counsel and/or other consultants and representatives 

and to fix fees for such counsel, consultants, and/or representative(s), subject to 

the limitations of existing federal law.

(i) 

To initiate such administrative proceedings and/or legal action on behalf of the 

Tribe as may be necessary to protect the interests of the Tribe and its members.

(j) 

Subject to Article X of this Constitution, to form or join tribal courts/consortia/ 

organizations now existing or yet to be formed for the purpose of exercising the 

Tribe’s civil and criminal jurisdiction and protecting the rights and interest of the 

Tribe’s members, including, but not limited to, those rights and interests described 

in the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C.SS.1901 et seq.

(k) 

To create, regulate or join subordinate organizations; and to delegate such 

organizations, or to any subordinate boards or officials of the Tribe any of the 

foregoing powers, reserving the right to review and rescind any action taken under

(l) 

To provide a limited waiver of sovereign immunity for business proposes by a 

two-thirds (2/3) majority vote.

(m) 

To preserve, protect and uphold the Constitution of the Tribe.

Section 2.  General Powers

The Tribal Council shall have all of the appropriate powers necessary to implement 

specific provisions of the Constitution and to effectively govern the affairs of the Tribe. 

All other powers heretofore vested in the Tribe and not specifically referred to in this 

Constitution, including the waiver of the Tribe’s sovereign immunity, except pursuant to 

part (1) of Section 1, above, are reserved to the General Council, and may be exercised at 

a General Council meeting or through referendum or appropriate amendment to this 

Constitution.

Article VII - Meetings

Section 1. Tribal Council Meetings

(a) 

Regular Meeting

Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held at least once each month at a 

date, place and time designated by the Tribal Council or at such other times as the 

Tribal Council shall provide by resolution, provided, however, that once the Tribe 

acquires tribal land and a building on its land suitable to hold Tribal Council 

meetings, all regular Tribal Council meetings shall be held on the Tribe’s land.

(b) 

Special Meetings

Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the Chairperson at 

his/her discretion, and shall be called by the Chairperson within twenty-four (24) 

hours of receipt of a petition signed by at least three (3) Tribal Council members, 

provided that the reason for the meeting is stated in the petition. Upon refusal of 

the Chairperson to call a special meeting, the petitioning Tribal Council Members 

may proceed to call and conduct the special meeting provided that due notice is 

 given to all Tribal Council Members and a quorum is present. Twenty-four (24) 

hours written or verbal notice shall be given to every Tribal Council Member of 

each special meeting.

(c) 

Quorum

No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the Tribal Council unless a 

quorum is present. A quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of at least four 

(4) members.

(d) Tribal Council Rules of Order

Within six months from enactment of this Constitution the Tribal Council shall 

enact an ordinance establishing rules of procedure for conducting Tribal Council 

meetings and shall call this ordinance "Tribal Council Rules of Order". The Tribal 

Council Rules of Order shall provide that all Tribal Council meetings shall be open 

to the General Council, except those items that are designated by the Tribal 

Council in the Tribal Council Rules of Order as being appropriate for executive 

session.

(e) Abstention Requirements

No member of the Tribal Council shall cast a vote on a matter in which the 

member has a material financial or personal interest, either directly or by virtue of 

that member’s personal, professional, or business relationship.

Section 2. General Council Meetings

(a) 

Annual. Meetings

The General Council shall meet at least twice per year during the months of 

January and July at a place designated by the Tribal Council upon thirty (30) days 

written notice to all members of the General Council

(b) 

Special Meetings

A special meeting of the General Council may be called by the Chairperson of the 

Tribal Council. A special meeting of the General Council shall be called by the 

Chairperson of the Tribal Council upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least 

twenty-five percent (25%) of the General Council A special meeting may be held 

only if at least ten (10) business days written notice of the date, time, place and 

reason for the meeting is provided to ah members of the General Council. If the 

petition is determined to be valid by the Secretary of the Tribal Council and the 

Chairperson of the Tribal Council does not call and give notice of the meeting 

within ten (10) business days after validation, the Vice Chanperson or next ranking 

officer shall exercise the authority to call the special meeting, and if no Tribal 

Council member calls and gives notice of the special meeting, the Elections Board 

shall proceed to call, give notice of and conduct the special meeting. A special 

meeting of the General Council shall not be canceled after the ten-day notice is 

given. In any special meeting the General Council shall have the same power to 

transact business as in a regular General Council meeting, including, but not limited 

to, calling an election for any reason. If the Tribal Council or the Elections Board 

do not call a special meeting to address the valid petition, then the spokesperson - 

for the petition may call and chair the General Council meeting consistent with the 

notice requirements in Article VII, Section 2. b.

(c) 

Quorum

No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the General Council unless a 

quorum is present and ten (10) days written notice is provided to all General 

Council Members. A quorum of the General Council shall consist of at least thirty 

percent (30%) of the members of the General Council Tribal Council members 

present at any General Council meeting shall count toward a quorum.

Article VIII — Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairperson

The Chairperson of the Tribal Council shall:

(a) 

Serve as the Chairperson of the General Council;

(b) 

Preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council and of the General Council;

(c) 

Execute on behalf of the Tribe all contracts, leases or other documents approved

by the Tribal Council or the General Council;

(d) 

Supervise key employees and committees of the Tribe, subject to any limits 

specified by the Tribal Council, and see that their duties are properly performed;

(e) 

Be the official representative of the Tribe between sessions of the Tribal Council;

(f) 

Be present at all meetings of the Tribal and General Councils, unless prevented 

from doing so by illness or circumstances beyond his/her control; and

(g) 

Prepare an agenda for each regular General Council meeting and cause it to be 

posted in at least three public places at least thirty (30) days before the meeting. 

The items on the agenda shall include, but not be limited to:

(1) 

presentation of the Tribe's annual audit for all tribal enterprises by the 

Treasurer and/or bookkeeper/financial officers;

(2) 

a written report presented by the Treasurer of the finances of the tribal 

government;

(3) 

a written report presented by the Secretary listing the names of all persons 

who have enrolled, disenrolled, or who have relinquished their 

membership in the Tribe during the fiscal year immediately preceding the 

meeting;

(4) 

a written report presented by the Chairperson on all ordinances enacted by 

the Tribal Council since the last General Council meeting, with a short 

summary explaining each ordinance; and

(5) 

a written report presented by the Vice-Chairperson of the Tribe on the 

status of all tribal lands, including but not limited to, the acquisition, 

disposition, lease, encumbrance or condemnation of tribal lands, the status 

of all lands being placed into federal trust and the amount, if any, of all 

lease payments paid to the tribal government for each lease.

Section 2.  Vice-Chairperson

The Vice-Chairperson of the Tribal Council shall:

(a) 

Serve as the Vice Chairperson of the General Council, and otherwise assist the 

Chairperson when called upon to do so.

(b) 

Preside over meetings of the Tribal Council and/or General Council in the absence

or incapacity of the Chairperson, and in that capacity shall be entitled to exercise 

all powers and be obligated to discharge all of the responsibilities of the 

Chairperson, and vote only under the circumstances the Chairperson can vote. 

.

(c) 

Be present at all meetings of the Tribal and General Councils unless prevented 

from doing so by illness or circumstances beyond his/her control; and

(d) 

Prepare and present a written report at General Council meetings as described in 

Article VIII, Section 1 (g) (5).

Section 3. Secretary

The Secretary of the Tribal Council shall:

(a) 

Call the roll, handle all official correspondence of the Tribal Council, certify and 

keep, or cause to be kept, the minutes of all regular and special meetings of the 

Tribal and General Councils; and certify and keep, or cause to be kept, the 

amendments to this Constitution and the enactment of ordinances and resolutions;

(b) 

Be present at all meetings of the Tribal and General Councils unless prevented 

from doing so by illness or circumstances beyond his/her control

(c) 

In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, perform all duties and 

assume the responsibilities vested in the Chairperson, and vote only under the 

circumstances the Chairperson can vote;

(d) 

Ensure that copies of this Constitution and all resolutions, ordinances, Tribal

Council minutes, General Council minutes, amendments to such documents, and 

proposed amendments to such documents are kept on file in the tribal office and 

in at least one safe and secure backup location; and

(e) 

Prepare and present a written report at General Council meetings as described in 

Article VIII, Section 1 (g) (3).

Section 4. Treasurer

The Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall:

(a) 

Accept, keep and safeguard all funds under the exclusive control of the Tribe by 

depositing them in a bank insured by an agency of the federal government as 

directed by the Tribal Council The Treasurer shall not pay or otherwise disburse 

any funds in the custody of the Tribal Council, or allow such funds to be 

disbursed except under procedures for such action that are properly authorized by 

the Tribal Council

(b) 

Keep or cause to be kept an accurate record of all tribal funds and shall report on 

all receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all such funds in 

his/her custody to the Tribal and General Councils at regular meetings and at such 

other times as requested by either Council;

(c) 

Have the books and records of the Tribe audited annually by a competent 

independent auditor employed by the Tribal Council;

(d) 

Be present at all meetings of the Tribal Council and General Council unless 

prevented from doing so by illness or circumstances beyond his/her control;

(e) 

Provide a surety bond in an amount satisfactory to the Tribal Council The cost 

of the surety bond shall be paid by the Tribe;

(f) 

Ensure that all checks and vouchers drawn on Tribal funds are signed and 

approved by two designated check-signers of the Tribe as established within an 

ordinance that is adopted by the Tribal Council; and

(g) 

Prepare and present a written report at General Council meetings as described in 

Article VII, Section 1 (g) (1) - (2).

Section 5.  Appointed Officers and Committees

The duties of all appointed officers and all created committees shall be clearly defined by 

the Tribal Council when, and in the ordinance or resolution by which, such officers and 

committees are appointed or created. Such officers and/or committees shall report on 

their activities and decisions as directed by the Tribal Council, and such actions and 

decisions shall be subject to the review and approval of the Tribal Council

Section 6. Oath of Office

Each officer of the Tribe elected or appointed under this Constitution or under any 

resolution or ordinance enacted by the Tribe shall take a public oath of office before 

assuming the duties or acquiring any powers of their office, by which oath he/she shall 

pledge to support and defend the Constitution of the Enterprise Rancheria. The officer 

shall place his/her hand on this Constitution and pledge as follows:

I, ________________________________, do solemnly swear that I will support, uphold

and adhere to the Constitution of the Enterprise Rancheria; that I faithfully and 

impartially will carry out the duties of my office to the best of my abilities; and that I will 

promote the general welfare and protect the best interests of the Tribe and its members.

Section 7. Attendance at General Council Meetings

All members of the Tribal Council shall attend all General Council meetings unless 

prevented from doing so by illness or circumstances beyond their control, and report on 

those items described in Section 1 of this Article.

Article IX - Referendum

Section 1. Power

The General Council of the Tribe reserves the power, by referendum, to modify any 

legislation, resolution or policy of the Tribe and to propose new legislation for the Tribe.

Any proposed referendum measure shall be presented to the Tribal Council accompanied 

by a petition signed by at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the General Council Upon 

receipt of such a petition, the Tribal Council shall determine the validity of the petition 

within fourteen (14) calendar-days. At any time during the fourteen (14) calendar-day 

period, the Tribal Council may enact the proposed referendum. If the Tribal Council does 

not enact the referendum within fourteen (14) calendar-days from the date of receipt of  

the petition, and the petition has been determined to be valid, the Elections Board shall call 

a special election for the purpose of allowing the General Council to vote on the 

referendum measure. The election shall be held within sixty (60) calendar-days from the 

original date of receipt of the petition. The result of the referendum election shall be final, 

provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the General Council cast ballots.

If the Tribal Council does not enact the referendum, and the Tribal Council and the 

Elections Board do not call the General Council election as required herein, then the 

Chairperson shall act, within thirty (30) calendar-days of the original receipt of the 

petition, to call a General Council meeting for the purpose of voting on the referendum. 

This General Council meeting shall be held within sixty (60) calendar-days of the original 

receipt of the petition. If the Chairperson does not call the General Council meeting, then 

the spokesperson for the referendum may call and chair the General Council meeting 

consistent with the notice requirements in Article VII, Section 2 (b).

Section 2. Limitations on Referendum

The Tribal Council shall declare invalid any petition on a proposed referendum on the 

grounds that the same referendum was rejected by the voters within the twelve-month 

period preceding the submission of the petition therefore. In addition, no referendum shall 

be set for election which would void, cancel abrogate, modify or amend any properly- 

approved contract, agreement or compact to which the Tribe is a party.

Article X - Judicial System

Section 1. Judicial Capacity

Until the General Council determines that the Tribe is financially and otherwise prepared 

to establish and maintain a Tribal Judiciary, the judicial authority of the Tribe shall be 

vested in the General Council

Section 2. Judicial Powers

When the General Council determines that the Tribal Council shall establish and maintain a 

separate Tribal Judiciary, the judicial authority of the Tribe shall be:

(a) 

Vested in a Tribal Judiciary as the Tribal Council may establish by law. The 

Tribal Court system shall exercise jurisdiction over all cases and controversies 

within the Tribe’s jurisdiction that arise under this Constitution, the laws or 

traditions of the Tribe, or which are vested in tribal courts by federal law.

(b) 

The Tribal Judiciary shall consist of at least one (1) Judge appointed by the Tribal 

Council

(c) 

Court procedures and responsibilities shall be determined by Tribal law.

(d) 

The tenure, salary and removal procedures for Tribal Judges shall be established 

by law. Tribal Judges cannot serve simultaneously in any other elected or 

appointed office of the Tribe.

(e) 

Decisions of die highest ranking Tribal Court shall be final and not subject to

review by the Tribal Council

Article XI - Severability

If any provision of this Constitution shall in the future be declared invalid by a federal 
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the 

remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.

Article XII - Amendment

Section 1.  Calling an Election to Amend the Constitution

This Constitution may be amended by the General Council through the exercise of its 

referendum power as described in Article IX, subject to the provisions of this Article XII.

Section 2.  Notice of Election

All General Council members shall receive a thirty (30) day written notice of an election to 

amend the Constitution and a copy of the proposed amendment, including any language to 

be added, deleted or otherwise modified.

Section 3. Quorum for Election

This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the General Council voting in an 

election duly called for that purpose, provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the 

members of the General Council shall vote in such election.

Article XIII - Ratification

This Constitution shall be effective when ratified by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the 

eligible voters of the Tribe voting in a special election in which at least twenty (12) voters 

voted. For the purpose of ratification only, “eligible voters” are those individuals listed on 

the BIA roll of Maidu Indians dated April 20, 1915 and their direct lineal descendants, 

eighteen (18) years of age or older, excluding those individuals enrolled in other tribes or 

bands of Indians, who are present at the special election for ratification.

Certification

I hereby certify that this Constitution was ratified on May 5, 1996 consistent with the

terms of Article XIII of this Constitution and that at least twenty (12) voters entitled to 

vote in the election to adopt this Constitution did vote, and that of those so qualified 2/3 

voted in favor of its ratification.

