 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
Of THE  
 
ENTERPRISE RANCHERIA 
ESTOM YUMEKA MAIDU

 
 APPROVED ON:  May 5, 1996
AMENDED ON: 

December 23, 2000
June 20, 2001 
February 27, 2002

Table of Contents

Preamble................................... .................................................................................................
Article I 
Territory........................................................................................................
Article II 
Membership

Section 1, 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4. 
Section 5, 
Section 6. 
Section 7, 

Eligible Members........................................................................... 
Application of Membership................................ . ........................
Ineligible Individuals....................................................................
Relinquishment................................................................................
Enrollment Ordinance 
Disenrollment................................................................. . .............
Protection.......................................................................................

Article III Governing Body 

Section 1. General Council..............................................................  
Section 2. Tribal Council........... ......................................................

Article IV Elections 

Section 1. First Tribal Council Election & Terms of Office..........  
Section 2. Eligible Voters & Tribal Council Member Requirements......  
Section 3. Candidacy for Tribal Council......................................... 
Section 4. Election Ordinance........................................................
Section 5. Elections Board.............................................................................
Section 6. Members of the Elections Board..................................................

Article V Vacancies, Removal and Recall of Tribal Council 

Section 1, 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4. 

Vacancy........................................................................
Removal............... .........................................................................
Recall of Tribal Council Members............ . ................................  
Recall of the Elections Board Members.....................................

Article VI Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council 

Section 1. Explicit Powers.............................................................
Section 2. 
Article VII Meetings 

General Powers.............................................................................

Section 1. Tribal Council Meetings............. . .................................. 
Section 2. General Council Meetings.......... ...................................

Article VIII Duties of Officers

Section 1. 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 
Section 4. 
Section 5. 
Section 6. 
Section 7. 

Chairperson....................................................................................
Vice-Chairperson....... . ..................................................................
Secretary........................................................................................
Treasurer............ ...................... i...................................................
Appointed Officers and Committee.............................................  
Oath of Office............................................................................... 
Attendance at General Council Meetings................... .............. .

Article IX Referendum 

Section 1. 
Section. 2. Limitations on Referendum 

Power................................................. .............................

Article X Judicial System 

Section 1. Judicial Capacity.......................................................... ..
Section 2, 

Judicial  Powers...............................................................................
Severability................................................................................. .................
Amendment

Article XI 
Article XII 

Section 1. 
Section 2. 
Section 3. 

Calling an Election to Amend the Constitution............................
Notice of Election..........................................................................
Quorum for Election......................................................................
Article XIII Ratification....................................................................................................
Certification ....................................................................................................................... 
Amendment Certification........................................................................................................

3
3

3
4
4
4
4 
4
5

5
6

6
6
6
6
7
7

7
7
7
8

8
9

10
11

12
12
13
13
14
14
14

15
15

15
15
16

16
16
16
16
18
19
 
 

 
 
 
 Constitution 
of the 
Enterprise Rancheria

Preamble

The Estom Yumeka Maidu of the Enterprise Rancheria, hereinafter referred to as the “Tribe”, hereby adopt 
this Constitution to establish a tribal government through which we may effectively exercise our inherent 
sovereign powers and privileges, and to preserve and maintain our unique cultural and ethnic heritage.

Article I-Territory

The territorial jurisdiction of the Tribe shall extend to all lands to which the Tribe has historic, legal or 
beneficial title, or may acquire in. the future.

Article II-Membership

Section 1. 

Eligible Members

Membership in the Tribe shall be limited to persons meeting the following criteria:

(a) 

Lineal Members

individuals who are lineal descendants of any Indian person named in the
document with the title “Department of the Interior, United States Indian Service Census of the 
Indians in and near Enterprine [sic] in Butte County, California,” dated July 20, 19151 (also 
known as (the 1915 Census)

(b) 

Non-Lineal Members

(1)  Individuals who are listed, or are direct descendants of an individual listed on any U.S 

Government Roll or Census of Maidu Indians from the Feather River Drainage Area, and who 
submitted a complete and valid application for membership with the Tribe on or before 
December 31, 1997.

(2)  Direct descendants of any Tribal Member enrolled pursuant to Section (b)(1).

(3)  Non-Lineal Tribal Members shall have the rights and privileges equal to any and all other 

Members of the Tribe, except for voting, and/or holding Tribal Council office2 and receipt of 
Tribal Non Discretionary funds3

Section 2.  Application for Membership

Except for individuals listed on the Department of the Interior, United States Indian Service Census of the 
Indians in and near Enterprine [sic] in Butte County, California, dated July 20, 1915 (also known as "the 
1915 Census”), all eligible members shall apply for membership, and shall be subject to the approval 
procedures for membership, as set out in the Enrollment Ordinance described in Section 6.

Section 3. 

Ineligible Individuals

Any person who is officially enrolled with or has received an assignment or allotment of land on the 
reservation of another federally-recognized tribe or who has relinquished his or her membership in the 
Enterprise Rancheria pursuant to Section 4, below, shall not be eligible for membership in the Enterprise 
Rancheria; except that:

(a) 

(b) 

interests in tribally assigned or individually allotted land acquired by gift, devise inheritance shall 
not be considered grounds for ineligibility; and

a person who is officially enrolled with another federally-recognized tribe may be officially 
enrolled with the Tribe after he/she has executed a written relinquishment of his/her membership 
in the other federally recognized tribe.

Section 4. 

Relinquishment

Any adult member may relinquish Iris or her membership in the Tribe, and the membership of his or her 
minor children, in writing. Any member who relinquishes his or her membership after reaching the age of 
adulthood shall no longer be eligible to be a member of the Tribe.

Section 5. 

Enrollment Ordinance

Enrollment of members after ratification of this Constitution shall be prepared under the purview of the 
enrollment ordinance adopted by a two thirds (2/3) majority vote of the Tribal Council. This ordinance shall 
include, but need not be limited to, provisions for enrollment procedures, an enrollment committee, 
application forms, approval and disapproval of the applications, rejection notices, appeals, corrections, 
disenrollment procedures and provisions for keeping the roll current.

Section 6. 

Disenrollment

Disenrollment of members shall be conducted under procedures described in the Enrollment Ordinance, 
within the following guidelines:

1)  Only the General Council may disenroll a member of the Tribe.
2)  Disenrollment shall be ordered by the General Council only after holding a duly called and 

noticed General Council meeting where a three-quarters (3/4) majority of those present votes in 
favor of disenrollment,

3)  Disenrollment is limited to members who have been either convicted of a violent felony or who 
have acted in a willful and malicious manner that might cause or has caused serious damage to 
the Tribe,

4)  The member, who could be disenrolled, shall receive at least thirty (30) days written notice of the 
charges against him/her and a description of the allegations which support disenrollment, and
5)  The member, who could be disenrolled, shall have the right to a fair hearing including, but not 

limited to, the right to face his or her accusers in the General Council meeting.

Section 7. 

Protection4

As a sovereign community of Maidu Indian people with deep roots in the Enterprise area, the lineal 
descendants of Indian persons named on the 1915 Census arc the core of the Estom Yumeka Maidu Tribe. It 
is the essential purpose of this Constitution to protect and preserve the existence of the Tribe for these 
persons for all time. The lineal descendants also wish to permit the continued participation of other enrolled 
Maidu persons as non-lineal members of the Tribe, provided that such participation never detracts from the 
ability of the lineal descendants to remain a self-defining and self-governing political and cultural 
community. The Tribe decided to admit non-lineal members to the Tribe in order to protect the rights of 
such persons to federal benefits to which such persons were entitled as Indians, but which they were unable 
to receive without tribal membership.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Article XI of the Constitution of the Enterprise Rancheria, in the event 
that any court or agency of competent jurisdiction shall issue a final ruling declaring invalid the current 
membership criteria of the Tribe, or the existence or composition of the Tribe’s General Council. Which is 
limited to lineal descendants of Indian persons named on the 1915 Census, or the inability to vote or serve on 
Tribal Council of non-lineal members, then all provisions of this Constitution and of any Amendment hereto 
providing tribal membership for any person not lineally descended from an Indian person named on the 
document with the title “Department of the Interior United States Indian Service Census of the Indians in and 
near Enterprine [sic] in Butte County, California,” dated July 20, 1915, shall automatically become null and 
void. In such case, all non-lineal members shall lose their status as tribal members, and shall no longer be 
entitled to any benefits of tribal membership, nor to residency within tribal lands or participation in any 
programs run by the Tribe exclusively for tribal members. The purpose of this provision is to protect and 
preserve for all time the right to tribal membership of the descendants of the Indian persons named on the 
1915 Census.

Article Ill-Governing Body

Section X. General Council

The General Council shall consist of enrolled members of the Tribe who are eighteen (18) years or older and 
who are either listed on the Department of the Interior, United States Indian Service Census of the Indians in 
and near Enterprine [sic] in Butte County, California, “dated July 20, 1915 (also known as the “the 1915 
Census"), or are the direct lineal descendants of such individuals. The General Council may exercise its 
powers through referendum, amendment of this Constitution, any powers provided to the General Council in 
this Constitution, and such other powers as may be reserved to it by this Constitution.

Section 2. 

Tribal Council

The governing body of the Tribe shall be the Tribal Council, which shall consist of seven (7) enrolled 
members elected by the General Council. The General Council shall elect its own officers5. These officers 
shall be Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer.

Section 1. 

First Tribal Council Election & Terms of Office

Article IV-Elections

The first election of the Tribal Council under this Constitution shall be held within ninety (90) days after the 
date on which this Constitution is adopted. At that election, the four candidates who receive the most votes 
shall be elected for four (4) year terms while the next three candidates shall be elected for two (2) year terms. 
Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for four (4) years, with the second election taking place approximately 
two (2) years into the future during the month of January, Thereafter elections shall be held every two (2) 
years on a staggered basis during the month of January.

Section 2 

Eligible Voters & Tribal Council Member Requirements

All members of the General Council at the time of the election, shall be eligible to vote. Any General 
Council Member who has been convicted of a violent felony or embezzlement shall not be eligible to serve 
on the Tribal Council for at least twenty-five (25) years after the felony conviction; and anybody convicted 
of any other type of felony shall not be eligible to serve on the Tribal Council for at least ten (10) years after 
the felony conviction.

Section 3. 

Candidacy for Tribal Council

Any member of the General Council may announce his/her candidacy for Tribal Council in writing no later 
than thirty (30) days prior to the election. The list of candidates shall be announced publicly at the regular 
Tribal Council meeting immediately preceding the election, which shall be at least two (2) weeks and no 
more than thirty (30) days before the election. The list of candidates shall be posted that same day at the 
Tribal Office or such other place or places designated by the General Council in an election ordinance. If the 
number of eligible candidates is less than the number of available seats on the Tribal Council, the Tribal 
Council shall fill the vacancy, after the election, under Section 1 of Article V.

Section 4. 

Election Ordinance

The Tribal Council shall enact an Election Ordinance prescribing procedures for fair elections to the Tribal 
Council, absentee balloting, voter registration, settlement of election disputes, handling of petitions and the  
conduct of referendum and recall elections, and elections to amend the Election Ordinance and this 
Constitution. All elections shall be conducted by secret ballot. Only the General Council may amend the 
Election Ordinance.

Section 5. 

Elections Board

AU elections, to the Tribal Council, shall be supervised and conducted by an Elections Board. The Elections 
Board shall comprise of three (3) members of the General Council, who have not been convicted of a felony, 
who are not members of the Tribal Council, and who are not candidates for the Tribal Council.

Section 6.  Members of the Elections Board

At the first General Council meeting following the adoption of this Constitution and at General Council 
meetings, as described in Article VII, Section 2 (a), the General Council shall elect members of the General 
Council to the Election Board by secret ballot. Such elections shall occur when the terms of current 
members of the Election Board end or vacancies otherwise occur. The initial terms of office for the two (2) 
members of the Elections Board who receive the highest number of votes shall expire at the next General 
Council meeting which is at least two (2) years after the Board member’s election. In the event of a tic, the 
winner shall be determine by chance. After the terms of the initial three members of the Elections Board 
have expired, the terms of office of all Elections Board members shall be four (4) years, with elections 
staggered every two years.

Article V-Vacancies, Removal and Recall of Tribal Council

Section 1. 

Vacancy

If a member of the Tribal Council dies, resigns, or is absent from three (3) consecutive regular Tribal 
Council meetings in any twelve (12) month period, the Tribal Council shall declare the position vacant. If 
less than two (2) years remains in that member’s term, than the Tribal Council shall, by a majority vote, fill 
the vacancy by electing a member of the General Council to serve remainder of the term. If two (2) or more 
years remain in the term of a vacant Tribal Council seat, then the Tribal Council shall elect a temporary 
Tribal Council Member, pursuant to the procedures described in the previous sentence, who shall hold that 
position until the next regularly-scheduled election.

Section 2. 

Removal

If a member of the Tribal Council is convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a felony while in 
office, or if a Tribal Council member is determined, based upon preponderance of the evidence presented at a 
duly noticed meeting at which that member is given a fair and reasonable opportunity to be heard, to have 
committed acts which are contrary to the best interests of the Tribe or otherwise to have abused the powers 
or privileges of his/her office, the Tribal Council may declare the position vacant by a three quarters (3/4) 
majority vote of the members of the Tribal Council. The member whose position is the subject of the vote 
may not vote.

Section 3. 

Recall of Tribal Council Members

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the General Council demanding the 
recall of any member(s) of the Tribal Council and setting forth specific reasons for such recall, the Elections

Board shall call a special General Council Election on the question of the recall within thirty (30) days from 
the date of the filing of the valid petition with the Elections Board. If the Elections Board does not call the 
General Council special election to address the recall petition, then the spokesperson for the recall petition 
may call and chair the General Council meeting consistent with the notice requirements in Article VII, 
Section 2, b. The election shall be held in the manner prescribed in the Tribe’s Election Ordinance. The 
decision of a majority of the voters voting in the recall election shall be final, provided that at least fifty-one 
percent (51%) of the General Council voted in the election.

Section 4. 

Recall of the Elections Board Members

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the General Council demanding the 
recall of any member(s) of the Elections Board and setting forth specific reasons for such recall, the Tribal 
Council shall call a Special General Council Election on the question of the recall within thirty (30) days 
from the date of the filing of the valid petition with the Tribal Council. If the Tribal Council does not call the 
General Council Special Election to address the recall petition, then the spokesperson for the recall petition 
may call and chair the General Council meeting consistent with the notice requirements in Article VII, 
Section 2 b. The election shall be held in the manner prescribed in the Tribe’s Election Ordinance. The 
decision of a majority of the voters voting in the recall election shall be final, provided that at least fifty-one 
percent (51%) of the General Council voted in the election.

Article VI - Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council

Section 1. 

Explicit Powers

The Tribal Council shall exercise the following powers and responsibilities subject only to those limitations 
imposed by this Constitution and applicable federal law.

a) 

b) 

c) 

d) 

To negotiate contracts or conclude agreements with Federal, State, Local and Tribal governments, 
private entities and individuals on behalf of the Tribe; to consult with the United States 
Government on all activities of all agencies of the United States which might effect the Tribe; and 
to advise the Secretary of the Interior and other federal officials on all federal projects for the 
benefit of the Tribe.

To promote the health, education and general welfare of the members of the Tribe and to 
administer charity and such other services as may contribute to the social and economic 
advancement of the Tribe and its members.

To encourage, foster and protect the traditions and the culture of the Tribe.

To develop and enforce resolutions and ordinances providing for the manner of making, holding
and revoking assignments of Tribal lands, providing for the levying of taxes and fees and the 
appropriation of available Tribal funds for public and other lawful purposes; providing for the 
licensing of businesses and other activities by any and all persons subject to the Tribe’s 
jurisdiction; providing for the exclusion of persons from Tribal lands; and on such other subjects 
as the activities of the Tribe may require that are not inconsistent with this Constitution.

e) 

f) 

g) 

h) 

i) 

j) 

k) 

l) 

To borrow money and provide for the repayment thereof, manage all economic affairs and 
enterprises, create tribally-owned and/or chartered corporations or other business entities and 
employ and discharge employees.

To manage, protect and preserve all lands, minerals, wildlife and other natural resources of the 
Tribe or to initiate and administer land development projects for the Tribe on Tribal lands. 
Notwithstanding the foregoing, acts to initiate or approve any acquisition, disposition, lease, 
encumbrance or condemnation of Tribal lands or property or to pledge newly purchased lands as 
security for loans on such lands requires a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of the full Tribal 
Council.

To create and maintain a Tribal fund for administrative expenses of the Tribe and to provide for 
salaries or wages for Tribal Council members and Tribal Officials as may be required; to 
administer any funds or property within the control of the Tribe for the benefit of the Tribe and its 
members, officers, or employees; and to allocate Tribal funds as loans or grants and to transfer 
Tribal property and other assets to Tribal organizations for such use as the Tribal Council may 
determine to be appropriate.

To choose and employ legal counsel and/or other consultants and representatives and to fix fees 
for such counsel, consultants, and/or representative(s), subject to the limitations of existing 
federal law.

To initiate such administrative proceedings and/or legal action on behalf of the Tribe as may be 
necessary to protect the interests of the Tribe and its members.

Subject to Article X of this Constitution, to form or join Tribal courts/consortia/-organizations 
now existing or yet to be formed for the purpose of exercising the Tribe’s civil and criminal 
jurisdiction and protecting the rights and interest of the Tribe’s members, including, but not 
limited to, those rights and interests described in the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C.SS 1901 
et seq.

To create, regulate or join subordinate organizations; and to delegate such organizations, or to any
subordinate boards or officials of the Tribe any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to 
review and rescind any action taken under such delegation.

To provide a limited waiver of sovereign immunity for business proposes by a two-thirds (2/3) 
majority vote.

m) 

To preserve, protect and uphold the Constitution of the Tribe.

Section 2.  General Powers

The Tribal Council shall have all of the appropriate powers necessary to implement specific provisions of 
the Constitution and to effectively govern the affairs of the Tribe.

All other powers heretofore vested in the Tribe and not specifically referred to in this Constitution, 
including the waiver of the Tribe’s sovereign immunity, except pursuant to part (1) of Section 1, above, 
are reserved to the General Council, and may be sovereign immunity, except pursuant to part (1) of 
Section 1, above, are reserved to the General Council, and may be exercised at a General Council 
meeting or through referendum or appropriate amendment to this Constitution.

Article VII-Meetings

Section 1.  Tribal Council Meetings

(a)  Regular Meetings

Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held at least once each month at a date, place and 
time designated by the Tribal Council or at such other times as the Tribal Council shall provide by 
resolution, provided, however, that once the Tribe acquires tribal land and a building on its land 
suitable to hold Tribal Council meetings, ail regular Tribal Council meetings shall be held on the 
Tribe’s land.

(b) Special Meetings

Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the Chairperson at his/her discretion, and 
shall be called by the Chairperson within twenty-four (24) hours of receipt of a petition signed by at 
least three (3) Tribal Council members, provided that the reason for the meeting is stated in the 
petition. Upon refusal of the Chairperson to call a special meeting, the petitioning Tribal Council 
Members may proceed to call and conduct the special meeting provided that due notice is given to all 
Tribal Council Members and a quorum is present. Twenty-four (24) hours written or verbal notice 
shall be given to every Tribal Council Member of each special meeting.

(c)  Quorum.

No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the Tribal Council unless a quorum is present. A 
quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of at least four (4) members.

(d)  Tribal Council Rules of Order

Within six months from enactment of this Constitution the Tribal Council shall enact an ordinance 
establishing rules of procedure for conducting Tribal Council meetings and shall call this ordinance 
“Tribal Council Rules of Order”. The Tribal Council Rules of Order shall provide that all Tribal 
Council meetings shall be open to the General Council, except those items that are designated by the 
Tribal Council in the Tribal Council Rules of Order as being appropriate for executive session.

(e)  Abstention Requirements

No member of the Tribal Council shall cast a vote on a matter in which the member has a material 
financial or personal interest, either directly or by virtue of that member’s personal, professional, or 
business relationship.

Section 2. 

General Council Meetings

(a) 

Annual Meetings

The General Council shall meet at least twice per year during the months of January and July 
at a place designated by the Tribal Council upon thirty (30) days written notice to all members 
of the General Council.

(b) 

Special Meetings

A special meeting of the General Council may be called by the Chairperson of the Tribal 
Council, A special meeting of the General Council shall be called by the Chairperson of the 
Tribal Council upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of 
the General Council. A special meeting may be held only if at least ten (10) business days 
written notice of the date, time, place and reason for the meeting is provided to all members of 
the General Council, If the petition is determined to be valid by the Secretary of the Tribal 
Council and the Chairperson of the Tribal Council does not call and give notice of the 
meeting within ten (10) business days after validation, the Vice Chairperson or next ranking 
officer shall exercise the authority to call the special meeting, and if no Tribal Council 
Member calls and gives notice of the special meeting, the Elections Board shall proceed to 
call, give notice of and conduct the special meeting. A special meeting of the General 
Council shall have the same power to transact business as in a regular General Council 
meeting, including, but not limited to, calling an. election for any reason. If the Tribal Council 
or the Elections Board do not call a special meeting to address the valid petition, then the 
spokesperson for the petition may call and chair the General Council meeting consistent with 
the notice requirements in Article VII, Section 2. b.

(c) 

Quorum

No business shall be transacted at any meeting of the General Council unless a quorum is 
present and ten (10) days written notice is provided to all General Council Members. A 
quorum of the General Council shall consist of at least 18 members of the General Council6. 
Tribal Council members present at any General Council meeting shall count toward a 
quorum.

Article VIII- Duties of Officers

Section 1.  Chairperson

The Chairperson of the Tribal Council shall:

(a)  Serve as the Chairperson of the General Council

(b)  Preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council and of the General Council;

(c)  Execute on behalf of the Tribe all contracts, leases or other documents approved by the Tribal 

Council or the General Council;

(d)  Supervise key employees and committees of the Tribe, subject to any limits specified by the Tribal 

Council, and see that their duties are properly performed;

(e)  Be the official representative of the Tribe between sessions of the Tribal Council;

(f)  Be present at all meetings of the Tribal and General Councils, unless prevented from doing so by 

illness or circumstances beyond his/her control; and

(g)  Prepare an agenda for each regular General Council meeting and cause it to be posted in at least three 

public places at least thirty (30) days before the meetings The items on the agenda shall include, but 
not limited to:

1)

2)
3)

4)

5)

presentation of the Tribe’s annual audit for all Tribal nterprises by the Treasurer and/or 
bookkeeper/financial officers;
a written report presented by the Treasurer of the finances of the Tribal government;
a written report presented by the Secretary listing the names of all persons who have 
enrolled, dis-enrolled, or who have relinquished their membership in the Tribe during the 
fiscal year immediately preceding the meeting;
a written report presented by the Chairperson on all ordinances enacted by the Tribal 
Council since the last General Council meeting, with a short summary explaining each 
ordinance; and
a written report presented by the Vice-Chairperson of the Tribe on the status of all Tribal 
lands, including but not limited to, the acquisition, disposition, lease, encumbrance or 
condemnation of Tribal lands, the status of all lands being placed into federal trust and the 
amount, if any, of all lease payments paid to the Tribal government for each lease.

Section 2. 

Vice-Chairperson

The Vice-Chairperson of the Tribal Council shall:

(a)  Serve as the Vice Chairperson of the General Council, and otherwise assist the Chairperson when 

called upon to do so.

(b)  Preside over meetings of the Tribal Council and/or General Council in the absence or incapacity of 

the Chairperson, and in capacity shall be entitled to exercise all powers and be obligated to discharge 
all of the responsibilities of the Chairperson, and vote only under the circumstances the Chairperson 
can vote.

(c)  Be present at all meetings of the Tribal and General Council unless prevented from doing so by 

illness or circumstances beyond his/her control; and

(d)  Prepare and present a written report at General Council meetings as described in Article VIII 

Section 1 (g)(5).

Section 3. 

Secretary

The Secretary of the Tribal Council shall:

(a)  Call the roll, handle all official correspondence of the Tribal Council, certify and keep, or cause to be 
kept, the minutes of all regular and special meetings of the Tribal and General Council; and certify 
and keep, or cause to be kept, the amendments to this Constitution and the enactment of ordinances 
and resolutions;

(b)  Be present at all meetings of the Tribal and General Council unless prevented from doing so by 

illness or circumstances beyond his/her control;

(c)  In the absence of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson, perform all duties and assume the 
responsibilities vested in the Chairperson, and vote only under the Chairperson can vote;

(d)  Ensure that copies of this Constitution and all resolutions, ordinances, Tribal Council minutes, 
General Council minutes, amendments to such documents, and proposed amendments to such 
documents are kept on file in the tribal office and in at least one safe and secure backup location; and

(e)  Prepare and present a written report at General Council meetings as described in Article VIU, 

Section 1 (g)(3).

Section 4. 

Treasurer

The Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall:

(a)  Accept, keep and safeguard all funds under the exclusive control of the Tribe by depositing them in 
a bank insured by an agency of the federal government as directed by the Tribal Council, The 
Treasurer shall not pay or otherwise disburse any funds in the custody of the Tribal Council, or 
allow such funds to be disbursed except under procedures for such action that are properly 
authorized by the Tribal Council.

(b)  Keep or cause to be kept an accurate record of all Tribal funds and shall report on all receipts and 
expenditures and the amount and nature of all such funds in his/her custody to the Tribal and 
General Council at regular meetings and at such other times as requested by either Council;

(c)  Have the books and records of the Tribe audited annually by a competent independent auditor 

employed by the Tribal Council;

(d)  Be present at all meetings of the Tribal Council and General Council unless prevented from doing 

so by illness or circumstances beyond his/her control;

(e)  Provide a surety bond in an amount satisfactory to the Tribal Council. The cost of the surety bond 

shall be paid by the Tribe.

(f)  Ensure that all checks and vouchers drawn on Tribal Funds are signed and approved by two 

designated check signers of the Tribe as established within an ordinance that is adopted by the 
Tribal Council; and

(g)  Prepare and present a written report at General Council meetings as described in Article VIII, 

Section 1 (g)(l)-(2).

Section 5. 

Appointed Officers and Committee

The duties of all appointed officers and all created committees shall be clearly defined by the Tribal Council 
when, and in the ordinance or resolution by which, such officers and committees are appointed or created. 
Such officers and/or committees shall report on their activities and decisions as directed by the Tribal 
Council, and such actions and decisions shall be subject to the review and approval of the Tribal Council,

Section 6. 

Oath of Office

Each officer of the Tribe elected or appointed under this Constitution or under resolution or ordinance 
enacted by the Tribe shall take a public oath of office before assuming the duties or acquiring any powers of 
their office, by which oath he/she shall pledge to support and defend the Constitution of the Enterprise 
Rancheria, The officer shall place his/her hand on the Constitution and pledge as follows:

I, _________________________________, do solemnly swear that I will support, uphold and adhere to the Constitution
of the Enterprise Rancheria; that I faithfully and impartially will carry out the duties of my office to the best 
of my abilities; and that I will promote the general welfare and protect the best interests of the Tribe and its 
members.

Section 7. 

Attendance at General Council Meetings

All members of the Tribal Council shall attend all General Council meetings unless prevented from doing so 
by illness or circumstances beyond their control, and report on those items described in Sectionl of this 
Article.

Section 1. 

Power

Article IX- Referendum

The General Council of the Tribe reserves the power, by referendum, to modify any legislation, resolution or 
policy of the Tribe and to propose new legislation for the Tribe.

Any proposed referendum measure shall be presented to the Tribal Council accompanied by a petition signed 
by at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the General Council. Upon receipt of such a petition, the Tribal 
Council shall determine the validity of the petition within fourteen (14) calendar-days. At any time during 
the fourteen (14) calendar-day period, the Tribal Council may enact the proposed referendum. If the Tribal 
Council does hot enact the referendum within fourteen (14) calendar-days from the date of receipt of the 
petition, and the petition has been determined to be valid, the Elections Board shall call a special election for 
the purpose of allowing the General Council to vote on the referendum measure. The election shall be held 
within sixty (60) calendar-days from the original date of receipt of the petition. The result of the referendum 
election shall be final, provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the General Council cast ballots.

If the Tribal Council does not enact the referendum, and the Tribal Council and the Elections Board do not 
call the General Council election as required herein, then the Chairperson shall act, within thirty (30) 
calendar-days of the original receipt of the petition, to call a General Council meeting for the purpose of 
voting on the referendum. This General Council meeting shall be held within sixty (60) calendar-days of the 
original receipt of the petition. If the Chairperson does not call the General Council meeting, then the 
spokesperson for the referendum may call and chair the General Council meeting consistent with the notice 
requirements in Article VII, Section 2 (b).

Section 2 

Limitations on Referendum

The Tribal Council shall declare invalid any petition on a proposed referendum on the grounds that the same 
referendum was rejected by the voters within the twelve-month period preceding the submission of the 
petition therefore. Tn addition, not referendum shall be set for election which would void, cancel, abrogate, 
modify or amend any properly-approved contract, agreement or compact to which the Tribe is a party.

Article X-Judicial System

Section 1. 

Judicial Capacity

Until the General Council determines that the Tribe is financially and otherwise prepared to establish and 
maintain a Tribal Judiciary, the judicial authority of the Tribe shall be vested in the General Council,

Section 2. 

Judicial Powers

When the General Council determines that the Tribal Council shall establish and maintain a separate Tribal 
Judiciary, the judicial authority of the Tribe shall be:

(a)  Vested in a Tribal Judiciary as the Tribal Council may establish by law. The Tribal Court system 
shall exercise jurisdiction over all cases and controversies within the Tribe’s jurisdiction that 
arise under this Constitution, the laws or traditions of the Tribe, or which are vested in tribal 
courts by federal law.

(b)  The Tribal Judiciary shall consist of at least one (1) Judge appointed by the Tribal Council

(c)  Court procedures and responsibilities shall be determined by Tribal Law

(d)  The tenure, salary and removal procedures for Tribal Judges shall be established by law. Tribal 

Judges cannot serve simultaneously in any other elected or appointed office of the Tribe.

(e)  Decisions of the highest ranking Tribal Court shall be final and not subject to review by the 

Tribal Council.

Article XI- Severability

If any provision of this Constitution shall in the future be declared invalid by a federal court of 
competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the remaining 
provisions shall continue in full force and effect.

Article XII-Amendment

Section 1. Calling an Election to Amend the Constitution

This Constitution may be amended by the General Council through the exercise of its referendum 
power as described in Article IX, subject to the provisions of this Article XII.

Section 2. 

Notice of Election

All General Council members shall receive a thirty (30) day written notice of an election to amend 
the Constitution and a copy of the proposed amendment, including any language to be added, deleted 
or otherwise modified.

Section 3. 

Quorum for Election

This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the General Council voting in an election 
duly called for that purpose, provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the members of the 
General Council shall vote in such election.

Article XIII-Ratification

The Constitution shall be effective when ratified by a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the eligible voters 
of the Tribe voting in a special election in which at least twelve (12) voters voted. For the purpose of 
ratification only,’’eligible voters” are those individuals listed on the Department of the Interior,

United States Indian Service Census of the Indians in and near Enterprine [sic] in Butte County, 
California, dated July 20, 1915 (also known as the “1915 Census”) and their direct lineal 
descendants, eighteen (18) years of age or older, the BIA Roll of Maidu Indians dated, July 20, 1915 
and their direct lineal descendants, eighteen (18) years of age or older, excluding those individuals 
enrolled in other tribes or bands of Indians, who are present at the special election for ratification.

Certification

I hereby certify that this Constitution was ratified May 5, 1996 consistent with the

terms of Article XIII of this Constitution and that at least twenty (12) voters entitled to 

vote in the election to adopt this Constitution did vote, and that of those so qualified 2/3 

voted in few of its ratification.

Chairperson, Arthur Angle
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 I, hereby, certify that this Constitution was amended on December 23, 2000, June 20, 2001 and 
February 27, 2002, consistent with the terms of Article IX of this Constitution.

Amendment #1Ratified on December 23, 2000-Gencral Council Quorum

Amendment #2 Ratified on June 20,2001-Election of Tribal Council Officers

Amendment #3 Ratified on June 20, 2001-Limitation of Eligibility of Non-Lineal Members

Amendment #4 Ratified on June 20, 2001-Correction of Mistake in Date and Description of 
1915 Census.

Amendment #5 Ratified on June 20, 2001-Protection of the Tribe from Legal Challenges under 
the Equal Protection clause of the Indian Civil Rights Act

Amendment #6 Ratified on February 27, 2002-Non-Lineal Tribal Members Ineligible to 
Receive Tribal Non-Discretionary Funds.

