 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE

 
  
  
 FORT McDERMITT PAIUTE AND 
 
SHOSHONE TRIBE

NEVADA

 
 APPROVED JULY 2, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 


 
 WASHINGTON: 1936

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE FORT McDERMITT  
 
PAIUTE AND SHOSHONE TRIBE

PREAMBLE


We, the Indians of the former Fort McDermitt Military Reserve, 
in order to establish a legal tribal organization, to secure certain 
privileges and powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization 
Act, and to create a governing unit through which we may properly 
assume our new responsibilities, do hereby ordain and establish this 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Sho
shone Tribe.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone 
Tribe shall extend to all territory comprised within the Fort Mc
Dermitt Indian Reservation as defined in the Act of January 17, 
1936 (Public, No. 419, 74th Cong.), and to such other lands as may 
now or hereafter be held by the tribe.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and 

Shoshone Tribe shall consist of—

(a)  All original allottees at Fort McDermitt, and such of their 
descendants as do now maintain a bona-fide residence on the former 
Fort McDermitt Military Reserve.

(b)  Every child of one-fourth or more Indian blood both of whose 
parents are members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone 
Tribe.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall have the power, by an affirmative 
vote of two-thirds of its members, to admit to tribal membership:
(a)  Any person of one-quarter or more Paiute or Shoshone Indian 

blood.

(b)  Any person of one-half or more Indian blood married to a 

member of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe.

Sec. 3. (a) The Tribal Council shall cancel the membership of 
any adult person who makes application to sever his tribal relations, 
and thereafter such person shall cease to hold membership in the 
tribe.

(b)  The Tribal Council may by a two-thirds vote cancel the mem
bership of any person who has not lived within the jurisdiction of 
the tribe for at least 1 year during the preceding 3 years, provided 
that this power shall become effective 1 year after the adoption and 
ratification of this constitution.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Fort McDermitt Paiute 
and Shoshone Tribe shall consist of a council known as the Fort 
McDermitt Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. The Fort McDermitt Tribal Council shall consist of eight 

councilmen who shall be elected by secret ballot.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council as organized shall elect from within 
its own number a tribal chairman and a tribal vice chairman, and 
from within or without its own membership a tribal secretary, a 
tribal treasurer, and such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. Councilmen shall hold office for a term of 4 years, except 
that the first council elected under this constitution shall hold office 
until the next regular election in 1937. At the 1937 election the four 
candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office for 
4 years, and the four candidates receiving the next highest number 
of votes shall hold office for 2 years. Thereafter, every 2 years four 
councilmen shall be chosen for a term of 4 years.

Article IV—Nominations and Elections

Section 1. The first election of a tribal council under this consti
tution shall be called, held, and supervised by the present Tribal 
Council within 30 days after the ratification and approval of this 
constitution, and thereafter elections shall be held every 2 years on 
the second Saturday of November, beginning with the year 1937.

Sec. 2. Any qualified voter of the tribe may announce his candi
dacy for the council by notifying the secretary of the Tribal Council 
in writing of his candidacy at least 15 days prior to the election. It 
shall be the duty of the secretary to post the names of all candidates 
who have met these requirements at least 10 days before the election. 
 Sec. 3. The Tribal Council or a board appointed by the Council 
shall determine rules and regulations governing elections, and shall 
certify to the election of members of the Council within 2 days after 
the election returns are in.

Sec. 4. Any member of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone 

Tribe who is 21 years of age or over shall be entitled to vote.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a councilman or other tribal officer shall die, resign, 
voluntarily resign from tribal membership, or be removed from office, 
the Council shall declare the office vacant and appoint a successor to 
fill such vacancy until the next regular election.

Sec. 2. Any councilman or other tribal officer who is proven guilty 
of improper conduct, or of gross neglect of duty, may be expelled 
from office by a two-thirds vote of the Council members, provided 
that the accused official is given full opportunity to reply to any and 
all charges at a designated council meeting, and provided further, 
that the accused official shall have been given a written statement of 
the charges against him at least 5 days before the meeting at which 
he is to be given an opportunity to reply.

Article VI—Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The Fort McDermitt Tribal 
Council of the Fort McDermitt Indian Reservation shall exercise the 
following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes 
or the Constitution of the United States.

To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments.

(a) 
(b)  To employ representatives or legal counsel, the choice of coun
sel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior.

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets of the tribe.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or federal projects for the benefit of the Fort 
McDermitt Indian Reservation prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Fort 
McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe in accordance with the terms 
of a charter that may be issued to the tribe by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe of 
Indians of the Fort McDermitt Indian Reservation, providing for 
the manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of tribal 
land or interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes and the 
appropriation of available tribal funds for public purposes, provid
ing for the licensing of nonmembers coming upon the reservation for 
the purpose of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, and for 
the exclusion from the reservation of persons not so licensed and 
establishing proper agencies for law enforcement upon the Fort 
McDermitt Indian Reservation.

(g) To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.
(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this constitution 
and the attached bylaws, regulating the procedure of the Council 
itself and of other tribal agencies, tribal officers, or tribal organiza
tions of the Fort McDermitt Indian Reservation, and exercising such 
duties as are conferred upon the Council by the attached bylaws.

Sec. 2. Future powers.—The Tribal Council may exercise such fur
ther powers as may in the future be delegated to the Council by 
members of the tribe or by the Secretary of the Interior or any other 
duly authorized official or agency of the State or Federal Govern
ment.

Sec. 3. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Indians of the former Fort McDermitt Military Re
serve but not expressly referred to in this constitution shall not be 
abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the people of the 
Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe through the adoption of 
appropriate bylaws and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Res
ervation, who shall, within 10 days thereafter, approve or disapprove 
the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary

of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of 
enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, 
by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him, within 10 days after its enactment, he 
shall advise the Council of his reasons therefor. If these reasons 
appear to the Council insufficient, it may by a majority vote, refer 
the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, 
within 90 days from the date of its enactment, approve the same in 
writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become 
effective.

Article VII—Land

Section 1. Allotted lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands, belonging to any member of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and 
Shoshone Tribe shall continue to be held as heretofore by their 
present owners. It is recognized that under existing law such lands 
may be condemned for public purposes, such as roads, public build
ings, or other public improvements, upon payment of adequate com
pensation, by any agency of the State of Nevada or of the Federal 
Government. It is further recognized that under existing law such 
lands may be inherited by the heirs of the present owner, whether 
or not they are members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Sho
shone Tribe. Likewise, it is recognized that under existing law the 
Secretary of the Interior may, at his discretion, remove restrictions 
upon such land, upon application by the Indian owner, whereupon 
the land will become subject to state taxes and may then be mort
gaged or sold.

The right of the individual Indian to hold or to part with his land, 
as under existing law, shall not be abrogated by anything contained 
in this constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily convey his 
land to the Fort McDermitt Indian Tribe either in exchange for a 
money payment or in exchange for an assignment covering the same 
land or other land, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 2. Tribal lands.—The unallotted land of the Fort McDer
mitt Reservation and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by 
the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe or by the United 
States in trust for the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe, 
shall be held as tribal lands, and no part of such land shall be mort
gaged or sold. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to individual In
dians but may be assigned to members of the Fort McDermitt Indian 
Tribe, or leased or otherwise used by the tribe as hereinafter pro
vided.

Sec. 3. Leasing of tribal lands.—Tribal lands may be leased by 
the Tribal Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Inte
rior, for such periods of time as are permitted by law.

In the leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given, first, to 
Indian cooperative associations, and secondly, to individual Indians 
who are members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe. 
No lease of tribal land to a nonmember shall be made by the Tribal 
Council unless it shall appear that no Indian cooperative association 
or individual member of the tribe is able and willing to use the land 
and to pay a reasonable fee for such use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the Tribal 
Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, in the 
same manner and upon the same terms as leases.

Sec. 4. Grant of “standard" assignments.—In any assignment of 
tribal lands which are now owned by the tribe or which may be 
hereafter acquired for the tribe by the United States, or purchased 
by the tribe out of Tribal funds, preference shall be given to mem
bers of the tribe who have no allotted lands or previous assignments 
of tribal lands.

No member of the tribe who may hereafter have the restrictions 
upon his land removed and whose land may hereafter be alienated 
shall be entitled to receive an assignment of land as a landless Indian.
The Tribal Council may if it sees fit, charge a fee of not to exceed 

$25 on approval of an assignment made under this section.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary pur
pose of establishing homes for landless members of the tribe, and 
shall be known as “standard” assignments.

Sec. 5. Tenure of standard assignments.—If any member of the 
tribe holding a standard assignment of land shall, for a period of 
2 years fail to use the land so assigned, or shall, after due warning 
from the proper tribal officials, persist in using such land for any 
unlawful purpose, his assignment may be canceled by the Tribal 
Council after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, and the 
said land may be reassigned in accordance with the provisions of 
section 4 of this article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a “standard” assignment, 
his heirs or other individuals designated by him, by will or written 
request, shall have a preference in the reassignment of the land, 
provided such persons are members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute 
and Shoshone Tribe who would be eligible to receive a “standard” 
assignment.

Sec. 6. Grant of “exchange" assignments.—Any member of the 
tribe who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land may vol
untarily transfer his interest in such land to the tribe in exchange 
for any assignment of the same land or other land of equal value. If 
the assignee prefers, he may receive, in lieu of a specific tract of 
land, a proportionate share in a larger grazing unit.

Assignments made under this section shall be known as “Ex

change” assignments.

Sec. 7. Leasing of exchange assignments.—Exchange assignments 
may be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian cooperative 
associations, to individual members of the tribe, or, if no individual 
Indian or Indian cooperative association is able and willing to rent 
the land at a reasonable fee, such assignments may be leased to non
Indians, in the same manner as alloted lands.

Sec. 8. Inheritance of exchange assignments.—Upon the death of 
the holder of any exchange assignment, such land shall be reassigned 
by the Tribal Council to his heirs or devisees, subject to the follow
ing conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or devisees who 
are not members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe 
except that a life assignment may be made to the surviving widower 
or widow of the holder of the assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or devisees who 
already hold more than a certain number of acres of grazing land, 
or other land or interests in land of equal value, either under allot
ment or under assignment, such amounts to be determined from time 
to time by the Council.

(c)  Such lands may not be subdivided among heirs or devisees into 
units too small for convenient management. No area of grazing land 
shall be subdivided into units smaller than 20 acres, and no area of 
agricultural land shall be subdivided into units smaller than 1 acre, 
except that land used for buildings or other improvements may be 
divided to suit the convenience of the parties. Where it is impossible 
to divide the land properly among the eligible heirs or devisees, the 
Tribal Council shall issue to such heirs or devisees grazing permits 
or other interests in tribal lands of the same value as the assign
ments of the decedent.

(d)  If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the provi
sions of section 4 of this article.

Sec. 9. Inheritance of improvements.—Improvements of any char
acter made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and inherited 
by members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe or 
otherwise disposed of under such regulations as the Tribal Council 
shall provide. No permanent improvements shall be removed from 
the land without the consent of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 10. Exchange of assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Sho
shone Tribe by common consent in such manner as the Tribal Council 
shall designate.

Sec. 11. Use of unassigned tribal land.—Tribal land which is not 
assigned shall be managed by the Tribal Council for the benefit of 
the members of the entire tribe, and any cash income derived from 
such land shall accrue to the benefit of the tribe as a whole. All 
action of the Fort McDermitt Tribal Council with respect to such 
lands shall be in conformity with departmental regulations for the 
protection of Indian range' and timber resources authorized by sec
tion 6 of the Act of June 18, 1934.

Sec. 12. Purchase of land by the tribe.—Tribal funds may be used 
with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior to acquire land 
under the following conditions:

(a)  Land adjacent to the Fort McDermitt Indian Reservation 
which is not now in Indian ownership may be purchased by or for 
the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe.

(b) Restricted land, which is in heirship status at the time of the 
adoption and approval of this Constitution, may be purchased by or 
for the tribe, with the consent of all the adult heirs, and the legal 
guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as may be 
agreed upon.

(c)  Land owned by any member of the tribe who is over the age of 
60 years, or who is physically incapacitated, may be transferred by its 
owner to the tribe in exchange for a pension of not more than twice 
the usual rental value of the land for the life of the pensioner, to be 
paid out of available tribal funds.

(d)  Land owned by any member of the tribe who desires to leave 
the reservation permanently may be purchased by the tribe, under 
such terms as may be agreed upon.

Sec. 13. Method of making assignments.—Applications for assign
ment shall be filed with the secretary of the Council and shall be in 
writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons applying for 
the land and as accurate a description of the land desired as the cir
cumstances will permit. Notices of all applications received by the 
secretary shall be posted in the agency office and in at least three 
conspicuous places in the district in which the land is located for not 
less than 20 days before action is taken by the Council. Any member 
of the tribe wishing to oppose the granting of an assignment shall do 
so in writing, setting forth his objections, to be filed with the secre
tary of the Council, and may if he so desires appear before the Coun
cil to present evidence. The secretary of the Council shall furnish 
the Superintendent or other officers in charge of the agency a com
plete record of all action taken by the Council on applications for 
assignment of land, and a complete record of assignments shall be 
kept in the agency office and shall be open for inspection by members 
of the tribe.

Article VIII—Referendum

Sec. 1. Upon a petition of at least 15 qualified voters of the Fort 
McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe a referendum may be de
manded on any enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution of the 
Fort McDermitt Tribal Council, and the vote of the majority of 
the qualified voters in such referendum shall be conclusive and 
binding on the Tribal Council.

Article IX—Amendments

Section 1. This constitution and the appended bylaws may be 
amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the tribe vot
ing at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior, provided, that at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall become effective 
until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call 
an election on a proposed amendment, if requested by a two-thirds 
(2/3) vote of the Council, or upon presentation of a petition signed 
by twenty-five (25) percent of the eligible voters, members of the 
tribe.

BYLAWS OF THE FORT McDERMITT PAIUTE AND SHOSHONE TRIBE

Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the Chairman to preside at all 

meetings of the Council.

Sec. 2. In the absence of the regular Chairman, the Vice-Chair
man shall preside and he shall have all powers, privileges, and 
duties of the regular Chairman.

Sec. 3. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to keep a true and 
accurate record of all matters affecting the records, to render a 
proper accounting of such records and statistics at all meetings of 
the Council and to keep an accurate record of all Council proceed
ings, including the minutes of each special or regular meeting. Such 
records shall be in triplicate, the original copy to be filed at the 
Fort McDermitt Tribal Office, one copy to be presented to the Su
perintendent, and one copy to be sent to the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

Sec. 4. The duties of the Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall 

be as follows:

(a)  He shall accept, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all funds 
in the custody of the Council, whether same be tribal funds or special 
funds for which the Council is acting as trustee or custodian. He 
shall deposit all such funds in such bank or elsewhere, as directed 
by the Council, and he shall keep an accurate record, filing same 
in the office of the Fort McDermitt Tribal Council, and he shall 
report in writing all receipts and expenditures and accounts and the 
nature of all funds in his possession, or custody, once every 6 months 
to the Tribal Council, or at any time he is requested to do so by 
the Tribal Council.

(b)  He shall not disburse any funds in his custody belonging to 
the Council except when authorized by a motion duly passed and 
properly recorded by the Council.

(c)  The Treasurer shall be required to furnish a bond satisfac

tory to the Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

(d)  The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at 
least once each year by a competent auditor employed by the Tribal 
Council or under the direction of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

(e)  Until the Treasurer is bonded, the Council may make such 
provision for the custody and disbursement of funds as shall guaran
tee their safety and proper disbursement and use.

Article II—Qualifications for Office

Any person to be elected as an officer or councilman, must be a mem
ber of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe and over 25 
years of age at the time of his or her election.

(a)  No person who has been convicted of felony shall be elected as 

(b)  The Tribal Council shall be the sole judge of the qualification 

an officer or councilman.

of its own members.

Article III—Conduct of Elections and Certification

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the Council to see that each nomi
nation for tribal office, including membership in the Council, shall be 
made in strict accord with the provisions of the constitution, and 
unless the Council shall certify as to the legality of such nomination, 
it shall be considered illegal and ineffective.

Sec. 2. All tribal elections for officers shall be canvassed and certi
fied by the Council or by a board appointed by it. No candidate shall 
be considered legally elected, nor shall he hold office until such canvass 

and certification shall have been made by the Council within 5 days 
after such election.

Sec. 3. All necessary details concerning tribal nominations a,nd 
elections not specifically covered by these bylaws or in the constitution 
shall be more fully set forth in ordinances to be hereafter established 
by the Council.

Article IV—Meetings and Procedures

Section 1. Immediately after the election of members of the Fort 
McDermitt Tribal Council and when the elected members are duly 
certified, as provided for in Article IV of this constitution, the 
members shall assemble and organize for business.

Sec. 2. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held monthly on a 

day fixed by ordinance.

Sec. 3. Special meetings of the Council shall be held at such times 
as are designated by the chairman, who shall notify members at least 
24 hours before the date of such meeting.

Sec. 4. At any special or regular meeting of the Tribal Council two- 
thirds of the Council members shall constitute a quorum and without 
such a quorum the chairman shall adjourn the meeting.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Council shall be held upon written 
request of four members of the Council or by petition signed by 15 
legal voters of the tribe, such written request to be filed with the 
chairman or secretary of the Council who shall notify the Council 
members at least 24 hours before the date of such Council meeting. 
Special meetings may be called by the chairman to meet with visiting 
county, state, or Federal officials or to transact business requiring 
council action before the next regular meeting.

Sec. 6. All sessions of the Tribal Council (except executive) shall 
be open to all members of the tribe. Balloting at all sessions shall 
be either by acclamation or by secret written ballot, as the presiding 
officer may direct.

Sec. 7. The order of business at any regular or special meeting of 

the Tribal Council shall be as follows:

(a)  Council called to order.
(b)  Roll call.
(c)  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
(d)  Reports of standing committees.
(e)  Report of Council Treasurer.
(f) Reports of special committees.
(g)  Reading of communications and reports.
(h)  Unfinished business.
(i)  New business.
(j) Adjournment.
Sec. .8. It shall be the duty of the Council to exercise care and 
caution to the end that a complete record is preserved of all acts of 
the Council and of all committees appointed therefrom. Accurate 
copies of all records shall be preserved in the files of the Council and 
accurate copies of all necessary records shall be transmitted to such 
Bureaus, Departments, or elsewhere as may be required.

Sec. 9. All records of the Council and its committees or delegates 
shall at all times be a matter of public record, and any member of the 
Fort McDermitt Paiute and Shoshone Tribe or his authorized representative 

 or any properly authorized officer or employee of any gov
ernment department shall have full access to same during business 
hours. However, it is provided that matters before the Council while 
in executive session shall be, at the option of the Council, withheld 
from the public or from individuals or their representatives, until 
after same shall have been acted upon or otherwise quietly disposed of.
Sec. 10. Copies of all leases, contracts, deeds, or assignments and 
all other papers and documents pertaining to lands of any nature 
on the reservation shall be carefully preserved by the Council, and 
insofar as it is possible all other documents affecting the rights and 
equities of the tribe as a whole, or the individual members thereof, 
shall be kept and preserved in order that such information shall 
at all times be available to the Council and to the individual mem
bers of the tribe. Duplicates of all such documents shall be deposited 
in the files of the agency.

Article V—Tribal Court (Judicial Code)

Section 1. (a) It shall be the duty of the Council to provide 
through the necessary bylaws or ordinances, for the establishment of 
a Tribal Court upon the reservation.

(b)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all such offenses as 
may be provided in the ordinances of the Council unless they fall 
within the exclusive jurisdiction of Federal or State Courts.

(c)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all Indians upon the 
reservation and over such disputes or lawsuits as shall occur between 
Indians on the reservation or between Indians and non-Indians 
where such cases are brought before it by stipulation of both parties.
(d)  The duties and jurisdiction of this court shall be more fully 

prescribed by appropriate bylaws or ordinances.

Sec. 2. The Council may establish by ordinance a tribal police 
force which shall have full jurisdiction upon the reservation. The 
authority and duties of this police force under which it will func
tion may be outlined by the Council, and such police shall be em
ployees of the Council and an agency of the Tribal Court.

Article VI—Property Regulations

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the Council, except as restricted 
by Federal laws, to pass rules and regulations to prevent unauthor
ized prospecting or mining of any kind upon the reservation and to 
see that such rules and regulations are properly enforced.

Sec. 2. The Council shall pass ordinances for the control of hunt
ing and fishing upon the reservation, such ordinances not to be in 
conflict with any of the Federal Game Laws. The Council shall 
enforce such ordinances and cooperate with federal authorities in 
the protection of game on the reservation. The Council may issue 
licenses for hunting and fishing and prohibit hunting and fishing 
without such license.

Article VII—Public Welfare

Section 1. Community welfare.—(a) The Council at all times 
shall determine m careful maimer what constitutes just cause for aid 

or assistance to the indigent members of the tribe, and shall make 
provisions for recommendation to proper agencies of individuals 
needing relief.

(b)  The Council shall designate persons who shall cooperate in the 
administration of welfare work on the reservation, and the solicita
tion and expenditure of welfare funds shall be conducted in a sys
tematic manner so that the right to do so may not be abused. It 
shall seek and cooperate with such welfare organizations and thereby 
render assistance or aid to the aged, the physically handicapped, and 
all others in actual need of aid.

(c) The Council shall at all times endeavor to discuss and elimi
nate the causes for indigency, exercising wise and judicious supervi
sion and management of the affairs of the tribe and, so far as possible 
of the finances of individual members of the tribe, to the end that 
need, privation, and financial distress may be entirely eliminated 
among the members of the tribe.

Sec. 2. Education.—(a) The Council may pass resolutions to pro
mote and increase learning and education among the members of the 
tribe, and may study present school systems to recommend plans for 
their improvement to the proper Bureaus and Departments.

(b)  The Council shall enter into negotiations with nonreservation 
schools and procure for the members of the tribe the highest type of 
educational facilities, to the end that younger members of the tribe 
shall have every possible economic, social, and cultural advantage.

(c)  The Council shall encourage and promote among the residents 
of the reservation by every practical means, a proper system of educa
tion for members of all ages, in such subjects as home economics, 
hygiene, child care and training, agronomy, farm mechanics, etc., 
cooperating with State and Federal Departments, and agencies, which 
seek to promote such work.

Article VIII—Loans

The Fort McDermitt Tribal Council shall act upon all applica
tions for loans under the revolving fund; may make recommenda
tions to the appropriate authorities for loans to Indians under the 
reimbursable regulations for the purchase of property, stock, or 
equipment, or loans to Indians, for the payment of tuition and other 
expenses in vocational and professional schools.

Article IX—Application for Funds

The Tribal Council shall act in an advisory capacity upon all appli
cations to the Superintendent for the withdrawal from the United 
States Treasury of trust funds or any other tribal funds, and may 
adopt rules and regulations not in conflict with law, subject to the 
approval of the Superintendent, governing withdrawal of individual 
Indian monies.

Article X—Guardianship

The Tribal Council shall pass all necessary ordinances whereby the 
rights of minors and incompetents shall be properly safeguarded and 
shall see that the administration of such funds and other assets by 
guardians responsible to the Tribal Council shall be for the exclusive 

benefit of such minors or incompetents. It shall be the duty of the 
Council to make semiannual reports concerning all such guardianship 
funds or assets, such reports being matters of public record, with the 
exception of the trust funds and individual Indian money, which is 
deposited and supervised by the Superintendent under existing law.

Article XI—Adoption of Constitution and Bylaws

This Constitution and Bylaws, when ratified by a majority vote of 
the Indians of the former Fort McDermitt Military Reserve voting 
at an election called for the purpose by the Secretary of the Interior 
provided that at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the 
Interior, and, if approved, shall be effective from the date of approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved May 6, 1936, by the Secretary of 
the Interior, the attached Constitution and Bylaws was submitted for 
ratification to the Indians of the former Fort McDermitt Military 
Reserve and was on May 30, 1936, duly approved by a vote of 54 for, 
and 11 against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those en
titled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (Public, No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Harry Lassing, 

Chairman of Election Board.

Ross E. Hardin, 

Secretary of the Election Board.

Alida C. Bowler,

Superintendent in charge of the Reservation.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Fort McDermitt Paiute and 
Shoshone Tribe of the Fort McDermitt Reservation.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and 
Bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of tne Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and Bylaws.

Approval recommended June 26, 1936.

John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., July 2, 1936. 

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]

