HeinOnline

Citation:
George Emory Fay, Compiler %26 Editor. Charters,
Constitutions and By-Laws of the Indian Tribes of North
America (1967-1981 All Published).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Thu Jun 28 13:33:20 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device
 
 

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF THE FORT

INDEPENDENCE INDIAN COMMUNITY, CALIFORNIA

(PAIUTE)

 
 Ratified Jan. 9, 1965
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the people of the Fort Independence Reservation, in order to form a better 

community government, exercise rights and responsibilities and promote the welfare 
of the people, do hereby adopt the following Articles of Association.

ARTICLE I  — TERRITORY

The jurisdiction of this organization shall extend to the land now and hereafter 

comprised within the Fort Independence Reservation.

ARTICLE II  — MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1. The membership of the Fort Independence Community shall consist of:

(a)  All Fort Independence allottees who are living on the date of 
adoption of these Articles of Association, and

(b)  All living blood line descendants of Fort Independence allottees, 
regardless of whether the allottees are living or deceased, provided 
such descendants possess at least 1/16 degree Indian blood.

SECTION 2. A person, or his descendants, who has been allotted on another reser
vation or is officially enrolled with or is a recognized member of some other tribe 
or band shall not be enrolled. A. "recognized member of another tribe or band" is a 
person whose name is listed on the census roll of another tribe or band, or has rec
eived a land use assignment on another reservation.

SECTION 3. The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with an 
ordinance adopted by the general council and approved by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs or his authorized representative. Such ordinance shall contain provisions 
for enrollment procedures, enrollment committee, application form, approval or dis
approval of application, rejection notice, appeals, and provisions for keeping the 
roll on a current basis.

ARTICLE III — GOVERNMENT BODY

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Community shall be the General Council 
which shall consist of all members twenty-one (21) years of age or older. Each 
adult member of the General Council is also a qualified voter.

SECTION 2. The General Council shall elect from its membership, by secret bal
lot, a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman and a Secretary-Treasurer who shall constitute a 
Business Committee which is empowered to represent the Community in all negotiations 
with local, State and Federal governments or agencies; Provided, That the Business 
Committee shall not commit the Community in any contract, lease or other arrange
ments unless specifically authorized by resolution of the General Council.

SECTION 3. The first election of officers shall be held at the January meeting 

of the General Council following the approval of these Articles of Association by 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Thereafter, terms of office shall be for two 
years or until successors are elected. Any member, twenty-one (21) years of age or 
older, shall, if duly nominated and elected, have the right to hold office. Nomin
ations shall be from the floor at a General Council meeting held specifically for 
that purpose at least thirty (30) days before the election. The officers elected 
at the election preceding the approval of these Articles of Association shall remain 
in office until the next election.

SECTION 4.  The candidates receiving the highest number of votes for their re

spective offices shall be declared elected.

SECTION 5.  All elections, whether for office or referendum, shall be conducted 

in accordance with an ordinance, or ordinances, adopted by the General Council 
which shall provide for the dates thereof, the polling places, election committees 
and their duties, absentee balloting and such other procedures as are deemed nec
essary to provide a democratic election.

SECTION 6.  Meetings of the General Council shall be held on the first Wednesday 

of each month. Special meetings may be called at any time by the Chairman or a 
majority of the members.

SECTION 7.  Thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters shall constitute a 

quorum and no business shall be conducted in the absence of a quorum.

ARTICLE IV — VACANCIES AND RECALL

SECTION 1. If an officer shall die, resign, or be recalled from his office or be 

found guilty of a felony in any State or Federal Court, the office shall be automat
ically vacated.

SECTION 2. Upon receipt of a petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of the 
qualified voters requesting the recall of an officer, the Business Committee shall 
call a special election within thirty (30) days. The accused official shall be 
given a written statement of all charges filed against him at least ten (10) days 
before such election at which he is to appear and he shall be given a fair oppor
tunity to answer any and all written charges.

A majority of those voting in such recall election shall govern, provided that 

at least 50 percent of the eligible voters shall vote in the election.

SECTION 3. Any office which was vacated shall be filled by the General Council 

at its next meeting and such replacement shall serve the unexpired term of office.

ARTICLE V  — POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The General Council shall have the powers and responsibilities here
inafter provided, subject to any limitation imposed by the statues or the Constitu
tion of the United States.

A.  To negotiate with Federal, State, and local governments and to 
advise and consult with representatives of the Bureau of Indian Affairs 
on all activities of the Bureau as they may affect the Community.

B.  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to 
be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his 
authorized representative.

C.  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of reservation 
lands, interests in lands, or other assets of the Community made by any 
authority other than the General Council.

D.  To establish rules or procedures for the conduct of its affairs.
The following powers shall be set forth in ordinances or resolutions 
passed by the General Council and approved by the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs.

E.  To make assignments of reservation lands and to lease reservation 
lands.

F.  To administer Community assets and to manage all economic affairs 
and enterprises of the Community.

G.  To acquire property and to accept gifts.

H.  To borrow money and pledge the assets of the Community.

I.  To assess fees for payment of expenses of the Community.

J.  To control future membership, loss of membership and the adoption 
of members.

K.  To delegate any of its authorities or responsibilities to the 
Business Committee or any other committee which it might establish.

SECTION 2. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the General Council, but 

not expressly referred to in this Article, shall not be lost by reason of their 
omission but may be exercised through the adoption of appropriate bylaws or amend
ments .

ARTICLE VI — AMENDMENTS

Amendments to these Articles of Association may be proposed by a majority vote 

of the Community and be ratified and approved in the same manner as these Articles 
of Association.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE FORT INDEPENDENCE INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE

FORT INDEPENDENCE RESERVATION

 
 ARTICLE I — DUTIES OF OFFICERS

SECTION 1. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the General Council 
and the Business Committee. He shall execute on behalf of the Community all con
tracts, leases or other documents approved by the General Council. He shall have 
general supervision of all other officers, employees and committees of the Community 
and see that their duties are properly performed. When neither the General Council 
nor the Business Committee is in session, he shall be the official representative 
of the Community. The Chairman shall vote only in the case of a tie vote at Gen
eral Council meetings.

SECTION 2. The Vice-Chairman in the absence of the Chairman shall have the 
power and authority of the Chairman and may, if authorized by the Chairman, assist 
the Chairman in the performance of his duties.

SECTION 3. The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep the minutes of all General Council 

meetings and shall certify the enactment of all resolutions and ordinances. He 
shall attend to the giving of all notices required by the Articles of Association 
and shall receive all petitions provided for in the Articles on behalf of the Gen
eral Council. Copies of all minutes, resolutions or other enactments shall be sub
mitted to the Bureau of Indian Affairs as soon after enactment as possible. He 
shall have care and custody of all valuables of the reservation. He shall carry 
out the financial directives of the General Council, receive all local monies of 
the Community and keep an accurate account of receipts and disbursements. Funds 
shall be deposited in a Community account in a local bank selected by the General 
Council where depositor’s funds are insured by Federal Deposit Insurance Corpora
tion. All disbursements shall be made by check in accordance with resolutions of 
the General Council. He shall file a bond satisfactory to the General Council and 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs when either are of the opinion sufficient funds 
have accumulated in the Community treasury. The General Council shall authorize 
payment of the annual bond premium from the local Community funds. The Secretary- 
Treasurer shall give a financial report at all General Council meetings and all 
financial records shall be available for inspection by officers of the General 
Council, members of the Community and representatives of the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs.

ARTICLE II — ADOPTION

These Articles of Association, when adopted by a majority vote of the adult 

Indians of the Fort Independence Reservation, voting at a special election in which 
at least thirty percent (307.) of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be sub
mitted to the Comissioner of Indian Affairs for his approval and shall be effective 
from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 We, the undersigned, duly elected officials of the Fort Independence Executive 

Committee, do hereby certify that the foregoing Articles of Association were adopt
ed by members of the Fort Independence Indian Community at a duly called general 
meeting on January 9, 1965, by a vote of 40 FOR and 5 AGAINST.

VERNON J. MILLER, 

President.

HAROLD D. BUFF,

Vice President.

PEARL A. WILLIAMS,

Secretary-Treasurer.

Approval Recommended:

LEONARD M. HILL 

Election Committee

Area Director, Sacramento Area Office
Bureau of Indian Affairs 

Date: January 20, 1965 

Approved:

JAMES E. OFFICER

Associate Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Date: May 7, 1965.

S/ Irvin R. Miller
S/ LaVerne David
S/ Eleanor J. Bowers

