Constitution of the Camp 
McDowell Indians in Arizona 
(Yavapai People, 1933)

The Yavapai historically lived in what is today central and west cen
tral Arizona, where they occupy approximately ten million acres of 
land. Yavapai is considered a major dialect of the Yuman language. 
Today the Yavapai inhabit three separate reservations, each run by its 
own tribal government:the Camp Verde Yavapai Indian Community; 
the Yavapai-Prescott Tribe;and the group this section focuses on, the 
Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Indian Community, which recently 
changed its name to the Fort McDowell Yavapai Nation.

Before the early 1860s the Yavapai had little contact with whites. 
In 1863, however, the discovery of gold quickly changed the demog
raphy of the region, as increasing numbers of whites intruded into 
Yavapai territory. Military posts were constructed, and efforts were 
made to pacify the Yavapai by forcing them onto reservations. Their 
most devastating defeat occurred in 1872, when a large band of 
Yavapai were massacred at Skeleton Cave in the Salt River Canyon.

Thereafter, they endured several forced relocations, as the ever
increasing white population demanded more land and water to irrigate 
it with. Struggling to cope with colonization, the Yavapai endured 
epidemics, harassment by local whites, and the difficulties associated 
with transitioning from a subsistence economy to wage labor, mining, 
farming, and ranching.

When Fort McDowell was abandoned as a military post, local 
whites and Mexican squatters moved into the abandoned territory. 
But the Yavapai, beginning in 1900, sent several delegations to 
Washington, D.C., led by Chief Yuma Frank, who requested that the 
abandoned fort be turned over to them. Their persistence paid off, and 
on September 15, 1903, President Theodore Roosevelt, by executive 

order, established the Fort McDowell Reservation. This tract of land 
was bisected by the Verde River, and from the time of its establish
ment, the Yavapai have faced pressure from non-Indians, who have 
desired both tribal land and water, and from the city of Phoenix, situ
ated less than thirty miles away.

One of the first American Indians to earn a medical degree was 
Dr. Carlos Montezuma, a Yavapai. From 1910 until his death in 1923 
Montezuma actively supported his people’s rights and worked to help 
them save their land and water resources.

According to the limited literature available, it appears that the 
Yavapai of Fort McDowell continued to effectively manage the pres
sures of living in an ever more congested area. Their traditional chief, 
or “civic leader,” helped to maintain tribal cohesion. In addition, the 
local Indian agent attempted in 1925 and 1927 to establish farmer’s 
and stockmen’s associations within the tribe. His organizational 
efforts were not successful, however, because of a lack of interest and 
intratribal squabbling.

The agent also reported that the infighting increased after 1933, 

when the local chief passed away: “The Chief [whom he did not 
identify by name]used to play a very vital part in all business meet
ings and had a lot of influence over the Indians of both factions.” 
The two feuding groups were called the “Gilbert Davis faction” and 
the Harry Austin faction,” and, according to the agent from the Fort 
McDowell Sub-Agency in Scottsdale, Arizona, “these two factions 
have never agreed on any business matters brought before them, in 
any of our meetings.” The fragmentary documentary record tells 
us that the members of these two groups each developed written 
constitutions, probably in 1933,and submitted them to the BIA for 
approval. The lengthier document was adopted on May 15, 1933, 
but was never officially approved because it was viewed “as going 
beyond legal powers.” The rival document, a mere page and a half 
long, was apparently “never adopted” by the tribal constituency and 
was also rejected by the bureau. Unfortunately, the incomplete doc
umentation is unclear on which faction authored which document, 
but both are presented here for study and review (copies in author’s 
possession).

After the IRA was adopted in 1934, the tribe’s leadership came 
together and on October 3, 1936, adopted, by a vote of sixty-one 
to one, a new constitution. John Collier approved the charter on 
November 13, 1936.

Khera, Sigrid. “Yavapai.” In Handbook of North American Indians, gen. ed. 
William C. Sturtevant. Vol. 10, Southwest, vol. ed. Alfonso Ortiz (Washington, 
D.C.:1983), 38-54.

Constitution of the Camp McDowell 
Indians of Arizona (1933)

We, the Indian people of the Camp McDowell Reservation in Arizona, in com
pliance with the advice of the United States and in order to establish our rights 
and privileges allowed under the law of the United States on our reservation, 
do hereby ordain and establish this our Constitution.

Article I

Section 1. All legislative, executive, and judicial power not specifically with
held by the United States and by the Indians themselves shall be vested in 
a tribal council known as the Federal tribal council, which consists of five 
members either male or female, enrolled or their descendents over the age of 
25 years and resident of this reservation and not connected in any way with the 
Indian Bureau, the United States, the State of Arizona, or leases, permits, or 
other occupant of this reservation not Indian themselves of this reservation.

Section 2. One of the said members shall be president, who shall be chair
man, one a secretary, who shall keep all records, and one a treasurer, who shall 
be custodian of all funds and shall hold office until the Tuesday in May, 1935, 
or until his or her successor is elected and qualifies.

Section 3. The tribal council shall have full authority to manage and regu
late all affairs and matters arising on said reservation, not herein specifically 
withheld or that may be held by the government of the State and Nation.

Section 4. Any franchise, lease, permit use or occupancy or other right or 
privilege, or the sale grant of any portion of said reservation, or the granting, 
use or relinquishment of any water right of the Indian people of this reserva
tion is hereby withheld exclusively to the Indian people of this reservation and 
only shall be delegated by a majority of the vote of said reservation qualified to 
vote, after first being unanimously approved by the council at least thirty days 
prior to such approval.

Section 5. As soon as elected, the council [shall] meet and approve their 
own government by-laws for the proper management of their own body and 
the reservation.

Section 6. The council shall meet officially on regular meeting days, 
which shall be the first in each month at o’clock of said day in the 
and shall not transact any business at other times, all of which said 

meeting shall be public to the Indians.

Section 7. The tribal council shall have the authority to refuse any persons, 
firm or corporation not a member of this tribe, the right of occupancy or the 
right to maintain any establishment or work or business or thing upon said 
reservation.

Section 8. Before any persons, other than tribal Indians, shall have the right 
to perform any kind of work on said reservation, approval must be obtained 
from tribal council.

Section 9. The tribal council shall have full powers of management of law 
enforcement, where not retained by the United States, and shall set up laws for 
the Indian people and establish a court and appoint officers or approve officers 
to be appointed by the Indian Bureau and particularly as follows:

(a)  To issue marriage licenses and perform marriage ceremonies.
(b)  To issue degrees of divorce and establish law thereafter in accordance 

with the tribal custom.

(c)  To prohibit other violations, where not inconsistent with the law of the 
United States and the State of Arizona, and to assist them in enforce
ment of their law.

Section 10. In all matters arising with outside interests the tribal council 
shall represent the Indian[s] of this reservation, but no binding contract shall 
be valid where inconsistent with Section 4 of Article 1 hereof or Section 1 of 
Article 3 hereof.

Section 11. The tribal council is hereby instructed to immediately start 
proper action against the City of Phoenix for proper redress for the occupancy 
by them of certain portion[s] of said reservation and for the acquisition of the 
Indian waters and water rights.

Article II

Section 1. An election of a tribal council shall be held on the first Tuesday 
____ of each odd year and the next regular election for tribal council shall be 
Tuesday, 1935.

Section 2. The tribal council shall hold offices for two years or until the 

first Tuesday ____ , 1935, or until their successors are elected and qualified.

Section 3. At all election meetings for approval and convention, 30 day 
posted notice shall be made at not less than three places posted on said reserva
tion, all of which must be held upon said reservation.

Section 4. All members of said tribe, now enrolled, and their descendants 
over the age of twenty-one years, male or female, shall have the right to vote 
upon all matters and at election meetings for approval and conventions.

Section 5. At nine o’clock in the morning of the day set for an election 
meeting approval or convention, those members of the tribe qualified to vote 
shall proceed to elect a chairman and secretary, the chairman [to] preside and 
the secretary to keep the record and three members additional, all of whom 
shall be qualified to vote, who shall act as the day board.

Section 6. The day board shall receive nominations at council elections 
for candidates for council, the voting shall then start, which shall be public 
and oral and no written ballot shall be used, each voter announcing in public 
his or her vote, which said vote shall be recorded to the candidates named. The 
candidates receiving the highest vote shall be elected President, the next high
est the Secretary, and the [next] highest the Treasurer, and so on until the five 
members are elected to fill the new council.

Section 7. Those eligible for council shall be residents of the reserva
tion, enrolled or their descendants, over the age of twenty-five years old, 
and not in the employment of the Indian Bureau, United States, Arizona, or 

any person or firm, not a member of the tribe occupying said reservation by 
lease, permit, or otherwise, and shall not so be employed during his or her 
incumbency in office.

Section 8. Any councilmen resigning, or who shall die while in office, shall 

only be replaced by special election called by the council for that purpose.

Section 9. A majority of the council must vote in favor of a matter and a 
majority of the voters present at any election meeting for approval, or conven
tion, must vote in favor of a matter before being declared passed. A quorum 
of the council shall be three members, one of whom shall be president and 
secretary. [sic]

Section 10. If any member of the council fail to attend two of the regular 
meetings in succession, if not too sick to attend, his office shall be forfeited and 
a special election called to replace, and members all meeting must be held on 
the reservation and public to Indians. [sic]

Article III

Section 1. The right to issue franchise, to lease, permits, occupy, to sell, grant 
any portion of the reservation or to relinquish, let assign, or otherwise use any 
water right of the Indian people of the reservation to any person other than 
the Indian of this reservation shall [not]be delegated to any person or per
sons other than the Indians themselves and only then upon having unanimous 
approval of the tribal council.

Section 2. The tribe of the Camp McDowell Indians hereby adopted the 
provisions of the law of the United States and particularly with references 
to the right of Indians securing work on their reservation in preference to 
others working thereon, and such work must be given to them in preference 
to others and to be distributed to them alternately, with equal rights to all 
Indians upon said reservation who are capable and willing to work.

Article IV

Section 1. Whenever two-thirds of the qualified Indian voters on said res
ervation or a unanimous vote of the council shall deem necessary any new 
amendment shall be proposed to this constitution and after due notice thereof, 
a convention may be held at which time a majority of the voters present having 
ratified the same, it shall then become a part of this constitution.

Done in convention after due notice to the Indian people, said convention 
then duly assembled, this constitution was duly ratified by a majority of the 
vote present and voting this 15th day of May, 1933.

The Constitution of Camp McDowell Arizona

We, the people of Camp McDowell Indian Reservation, in order to establish a 
legislative body to represent the Indians of this reservation to promote the gen
eral welfare and co-operate with the Government do ordain and establish this 
Constitution for the Indian people of Camp McDowell Indian Reservation.

Article One

Section 1. A council of five members male or female over the age of 25 years 
enrolled in this reservation or their descendants shall be elected and shall be 
known as the Camp McDowell Indian Council, one for president, one vice 
president, one secretary, one assistant secretary, and one treasurer.
Section 2. The duties of the officers shall be as follows:
The chairman or the president calls the council to order and announces its 
business and signs all documents. The vice president shall act for the president 
in his absence, the secretary shall record the proceedings of the council, write 
all letters, sign all records and is responsible for all papers belonging to the 
council. The assistant secretary shall act for the secretary in his or her absence, 
the treasurer shall handle all money of the council receiving and disbursing as 
ordered by vote, and account for it to the council.

Section 3. The council shall meet every first Monday of each month or 
[when] called by the president for special meeting at any other time and all 
meetings shall be held at the agency.

Section 4. If any member of the council should resign or in case of death 
while in office or [be] removed for any misconduct he shall be replaced by 
special election called by the council.

Section 5. Three members of the council shall constitute a quorum and 

shall proceed with the meeting.

Article Two

Section 1. All elections shall run similar to the United States ballot system.

Section 2. All voters now enrolled on this reservation or their descendants 

21 years of age or over shall vote by a ballot.

Section 3. Elections shall be held on the first Tuesday of every second 

year.

Section 4. Notice shall be posted at not less than three places on this reser

vation 30 days before any election for approval of convention.

Section 5. No candidates for the council office shall preside on the elec

tion board.

Article Three

Section 1. If the council deem it necessary to add new amendments to this 
constitution it shall call a meeting to pass or reject by the voters of this reser
vation and with the approval of the Government it shall become a part of the 
constitution.

Adopted by the Indians of this reservation by the majority vote this _  

day of _____year of 193___.

Approved
Approved
Approved

