 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS  
 

OF THE

FORT MOJAVE INDIAN TRIBE

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Fort Mojave Tribe, in order to establish a 
more effective form of tribal government and better exercise the 
privileges and powers of self-government, in order to use and restore 

 our ancient home in the Mojave Valley of the Colorado River, and 

rehabilitate- ourselves and fortune after being dislocated by the changed 
conditions resulting from the construction of Hoover Dam and by the 
overflows and backwater from Parker Dam and Lake Havasu and 
in general to improve our welfare, and enjoy and maintain our rights 
and privileges as citizens under the Constitution and laws of the United 
States of America, do establish this Constitution and Bylaws for the 
members of the Fort Mojave Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 Section 1. The authority and jurisdiction of the Fort Mohave Tribe 
shall extend to the following land areas: The so-called "Military 
Reserve" set aside by General Order No. 19 of the War Department 
of August 4, 1870, containing approximately 5, 582 acres, more or 
less; the so-called "Hay and Wood Reserve" also defined in said General 
Orders, containing approximately 9,114 acres, more or less; the so-called 
"School Reserve" set aside by Executive Order of March 18, 1903, 
containing approximately 7,000 acres, more or less; those lands 
set aside pursuant to Executive Order of February 2, 1911, containing 
17,315 acres, more or less; the lands totalling approximately 16 acres, 
more or less, comprising the Fort Mojave Indian Village, adjacent 
to the City of. Needles, California, which land was purchased with our 
tribal funds, and finally to such other lands as the United States may 
acquire for the benefit of the Tribe or the Tribe may subsequently 
acquire for itself or lands which are subsequently recognized as being 
lands of the Fort Mojave Tribe where title thereto is held in trust 
by the United States and it has been made a part of the reservation.

Sec. 2. The above lands constitute our place of origin and our 
continued habitation and occupancy, which is capable of proof at all 
times and has been so recognized by governmental action and court 
decisions over the years. It is hereby declared that the title to 
these lands includes, but is not limited to, all the surface rights, 
subsurface rights, tenements, hereditaments, all water rights and 
all accretions and that such lands are held by the United States of 
America in trust for the Fort Mojave Tribe of Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall consist 
of persons who meet the following eligibility requirements:

(A)  All persons of Fort Mojave Indian blood whose names 
appear on the official census of November 1, 1956, regardless 
of degree of Fort Mojave Indian blood.

(B)  All lineal descendants of persons listed on the above 
census who are of at least one-quarter (1/4) Fort Mojave blood 
and were born between November 2, 1956, and the effective date 
of this Constitution and Bylaws.

(C)  All descendants of persons in categories (A) and (B) of 
this Section who are of at least one-quarter (1/4) Fort Mojave
 Indian blood born after the effective date of this Constitution 

and Bylaws and who have at least one parent who is a member of 
the Tribe; PROVIDED, an application for enrollment is filed by 
or on behalf of such persons and is approved by the Tribal Council. 
If an enrollment application is not filed and approved, such persons 
shall not be deemed enrolled. Applications for enrollment shall 
be considered at the regular meeting of the Tribal Council following 
the filing of an application.

(D)  All persons who have been adopted as of the effective date 
of this Constitution and Bylaws.

(E)  All persons who may in the future be adopted into the Fort 
Mojave Tribe pursuant to Section 7 of this Article.

(F)  After the effective date of this Constitution and Bylaws, 
unenrolled children of adopted persons may be enrolled 
if (1), they are of at least one-quarter (1/4) Mojave Indian blood 
and (2) file an application for enrollment which is approved by the 
Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. All persons in categories (A), (B), and (D) above will be 
considered as enrolled on the effective date of this Constitution and 
Bylaws and no applications for enrollment will be required of them. 
All persons born after the effective date of this Constitution and Bylaws 
who meet the above eligibility requirements must file an application 
for enrollment and have it approved to be enrolled.

Sec. 3. A person shall not be eligible for membership if:

(A)  He has been allotted land on another reservation.

(B)  He is a recognized member of another Tribe, band, or group 
of Indians. "Recognized" means - he is listed on an official 
membership roll or received land assignment or land allotment 
on another reservation.

Sec. 4. A person shall not be considered ineligible for enrollment 
if he inherits or acquires (not through allotment) land on another reserva
tion if he otherwise meets the membership criteria of the Fort Mojave 
Tribe.

Sec. 5. A person shall not be considered ineligible for enrollment 
in the Fort Mojave Tribe if he is enrolled with another Tribe through 
a parent and yet meets the membership criteria of the Fort Mojave 
Tribe. If he wishes to be enrolled as a member of the Fort Mojave 
Tribe, he shall: (1) submit a written application, and (2) submit written 
evidence of relinquishment of his membership with the other Tribe.

Sec. 6. "Payment" rolls used in connection with the disbursement 
of monies awarded for land claims shall not be considered official 
membership rolls unless so designated by the Tribal Council.

Sec. 7. The Tribal Council shall have the power to adopt ordinances 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative which will establish rules and regulations governing 
membership, loss of membership, adoption, procedures for enrollment 
and preparation and approval of an official membership roll. The 
procedures shall include provisions for appeal if an applicant is denied 
membership.

Sec. 8. Corrections may be made to the current membership roll 
by the Fort Mojave Tribal Council at any time including, but not 
limited to, adding of persons who were left off the roll and are otherwise 
eligible for membership.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall be known 
as the Fort Mojave Tribal Council and shall consist of seven (7) members.

Sec. 2. The first election of Councilmen under the original 
Constitution was held within thirty (30) days following adoption and 
ratification of the Constitution. The three (3) candidates receiving

the highest number of votes held office for three (3) years and the 
candidates who received the next highest number of votes held for 
two (2) years, and the two (2) candidates who received the next highest 
number of votes held office for a period of one (1) year. In each 
regular election thereafter, candidates held office for three (3) years.
Following the adoption of this Constitution and Bylaws and in each 
regular election thereafter, candidates shall be elected and shall hold 
office for a term of four (4) years.

Sec. 3. Immediately after the regular election for Councilmen, there 
shall be an election for Chairman and Vice-Chairman by the registered 
voters, if either term of office has expired. The officers so elected 
shall hold such office for a term consistent with his tenure as a 
Councilman. The person(s) receiving the highest number of votes
shall be elected to the respective vacant office. Both the Chairman 
and Vice-Chairman maybe reelected to successive terms provided 
they are elected Councilmen.

Sec. 4. The Council shall choose a secretary and a treasurer from 
within or outside the Council membership. The Council shall also 
choose such committees from within or without its membership as 
may be deemed necessary as further provided for under Article IV 
- Powers of the Council.

Sec. 5. Any registered voter of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall be 
eligible to be a candidate for election to the Tribal Council if he has 
reached the age of eighteen (18) years and has been a resident of the 
Fort Mojave Reservation for the twelve (12) months past. The term 
"resident" shall be defined in an election ordinance.

Sec. 6. Members of the Council shall take office at a meeting of 
the Tribal Council which shall take place the first Saturday after an 
election at which time they shall take an oath administered either by 
the Chairman of the Tribal Council, Vice-Chairman or Chairman Pro 
Tem elected by a majority of the Councilmen in office, whichever official 
is available.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - POWERS OF THE COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Fort Mojave Tribal Council shall have the following 
powers:

(A)  To represent the Tribe and act in all matters that concern 
the general welfare of the Tribe, and to make decisions not incon
sistent with or contrary to this Constitution and Bylaws or the

Constitution and laws of the United States.

(B)  To negotiate and make contracts with Federal, State and local 
Governments and with any individual, firm, or company subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative where such approval is required by this 
Constitution and Bylaws.

(C)  To advise and consult with the Secretary of the Interior or 
his representative on all activities that may affect the Fort 
Mojave Reservation and to make appropriation requests to the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs on any project beneficial to the Fort Mojave 
Tribe.

(D)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative, so long as such approval 
is required by Federal law.

(E)  To veto the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 
lands or interest in tribal lands, tribal funds or other tribal assets 
which may be authorized by any agency or employee of the 
Government.

(F)  To protect and preserve the wildlife and natural resources 
of the Tribe; to regulate hunting, fishing or trapping on the 
reservation.

(G)  To cultivate Indian Arts, Crafts and Cultures.

(H)  To administer charity.

(I)  To negotiate permits and leases, subject to approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, for business, homesite and other purposes, 
and generally to provide for proper use and development of all 
tribal lands, natural resources and other tribal property.

(J)  To appropriate tribal funds for tribal purposes.

(K)  To mortgage or otherwise encumber tribal trust land and to 
borrow money from any source and pledge or assign chattels or 
future tribal income as security therefor with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(L)  Enact ordinances to regulate the use of all reservation lands

through zoning, taxation and otherwise.

(M)  To manage and control community property, community 
enterprises and other economic projects and programs of the Fort 
Mojave Tribe including, but not limited to, the establishment of 
housing and rental authorities, loan programs, and appointment 
of planning, programing, and development committees, and the 
development and approval of impact and environmental statements.

(N)  To authorize, charter, and regulate associations and 
corporations formed by members of the Fort Mojave Tribe for 
business or charitable purposes and to authorize formation of 
corporations under State or Federal law for economic, charitable 
or public purposes.

(O)  To provide by resolution or ordinance, the conditions upon 
which non-members may enter or remain on the reservation and 
provide for the removal or exclusion from the reservation of any 
non-members whose presence may be injurious to the tribal 
members or to the interests of the Tribe.

(P)  To regulate its own procedures, to appoint subordinate 
committees, commissions, boards, tribal officials and employees 
not otherwise provided for in this Constitution and Bylaws, to 
prescribe their salaries, tenure and duties. Appointees may or 
may not be tribal members.

(Q)  The authority to establish and prescribe rules for governing 
tribal courts and tribal law enforcement agencies and to provide 
for the maintenance of law and order on the reservation.

(R)  The Council may exercise such further powers as maybe 
delegated for the Fort Mojave Tribe by the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative.

Sec. 2. The foregoing enumeration of powers shall not be construed 
to limit the powers of the Fort Mojave Tribe and in no way shall be 
deemed an abdication or forfeiture of the Tribe's inherent attributes 
of sovereignty, and such powers may be exercised through the adoption 
of appropriate bylaws or constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE V - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Section 1. The relevant protections guaranteed by Title II of the Civil

Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 77) against actions of a Tribe in
exercising its powers of self-government shall apply to the Fort Mojave, 
Tribe of Indians.

Sec. 2. The members of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall continue undisturbed 
in their customs, culture, and their religious beliefs including but not 
limited to, the customs of cremation, ceremonial dancing and singing, 
and no one shall interfere with these practices, recognizing that we 

 have been a people and shall continue to be a people whose way of 

life has been different.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. General elections to vote for councilmen shall be held 
every year on the first Saturday in June. The voting place shall be 
as designated in an election ordinance.

Sec. 2. Special elections for councilmen shall be held upon call by 
the Tribal Council as provided in Article VII and IX, and notice of 
them shall be given as in the case of general or regular elections.

Sec. 3. All elections shall be announced by special notice posted at 
least thirty (30) days before the election at the voting places and other 
public places.

Sec. 4. Nominations shall be made at a general meeting of the Fort 
Mojave Tribe called for that purpose. Procedures for the nomination 
process shall be spelled out in an election ordinance.

Sec. 5. (A) All elections shall be by secret written ballot. All tribal 
members, eighteen (18) years of age or older who are registered to 
vote, can vote in any election. The Council shall have the power to 
prescribe ordinances, governing the conduct of elections for councilmen 
and officers of the Council and referendums.

(B)  If the Tribal Council shall fail to give the appropriate notice 
of the election, or in case a regular election has not been held, 
the Secretary of the Interior, upon the receipt of a petition signed 
by at least thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters of the Tribe, 
shall call such election and shall give thirty (30) days notice, setting 
the time and place of the election. The calling of an election shall 
take place no later than one-hundred-eighty (180) days from the 
date of the petition, according to rules and regulations prescribed 
by the Secretary of the Interior but such rules and regulations 

shall not differ substantially from tribal rules and procedures in 
effect and shall attempt to follow the tribal rules and procedures 
as closely as possible.

(C)  In any election wherein a procedural problem or conflict 
develops between tribal custom and the Constitution and Bylaws, 
this Constitution and Bylaws shall prevail.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - REMOVAL, RESIGNATION AND RECALL FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 1. If a member of the Council is convicted of a felony or other 
class of crime which involves dishonesty his office shall be considered 
forfeited upon passage of a resolution by the Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. If the Council decides by a 2/3 vote that a member of the 
Council has failed in the performance of the duties assigned him, he 
may be subject to removal. After such a decision, the Council shall 
advise the accused in writing of his failure and give him an opportunity 
to be heard in his own defense at a meeting of the Council within thirty 
(30) days after the Council made its decision. If the Council decides 
against the accused councilman, by 2/3 majority, it shall require such 
member to stand for reelection. A special election shall be immediately 
called pursuant to Article VI hereof. At least thirty percent (30%) of 
the registered voters must vote in such an election and a simple majority 
shall prevail. If the vote is against removal (NO vote), the Councilman 
shall reassume his office in good standing. If the vote is for removal 
(YES vote), his office shall be considered vacant. If less than thirty 
percent (30%) of the registered voters vote in such an election the 
council member in question shall reassume his office.

Sec. 3. Upon death or resignation of a councilman, the seat shall 
be declared vacant.

Sec. 4. Recall. (A) The registered voters of the Fort Mojave Tribe 
shall have the right to recall any member or members of the Fort 
Mojave Tribal Council by filing a petition with the Tribal Council 
Secretary signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the registered 
voters. The Tribal Council Secretary shall provide a list of registered 
voters, if requested by the petitioners. Before signatures are obtained, 
the petitioners must file a copy of the petition with the Tribal Council 
Secretary. If not filed, the petition will be considered invalid.

(B)  Within ten (10) days after receipt of the valid petition, the 
Tribal Council shall notify the accused councilman by registered 
mail, return receipt requested and request his presence at a meeting 

with the Council in writing of the charges against him and further 
advise him of his right to present his defense at a general meeting 
of the Tribe. The Tribal Council shall also set the date for said 
general meeting and schedule the recall election.

(C)  Voting shall be by secret ballot and at least thirty percent (30%) 
of the registered voters must vote in such an election. A simple 
majority shall prevail. If the vote is against recall (NO vote), the 
councilman shall reassume his office in good standing. If the vote 
is for recall (YES vote), his office shall be considered vacant.

(D)  If the councilman who is the subject of the recall or removal 
election is an officer, then a successful recall terminates his status 
as councilman and officer.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII  - VACANCY

 
 Any vacancies which occur on the Tribal Council as a result of recall, 
removal, death or resignation shall be filled in the following manner:

(A)  If the vacancy occurs within one-hundred-eighty (180) days 
of the next regular tribal election, the Tribal Council shall appoint, 
by majority vote, a qualified tribal member to fill the vacancy 
for the unexpired term, except that such appointed member shall 
not serve in the capacity of an officer of the Council.

(B)  If the position which becomes vacant is not one which is 
ordinarily filled at the next election, the vacancy will be filled 
at the election, but for only the unexpired portion of the term.

(C)  If the vacancy occurs more than one-hundred-eighty (180) 
days before the next regular tribal election, the Tribal Council 
shall call a special election to fill the vacancy for the unexpired 
term within ten (10) days after the vacancy occurs. Such election 
shall be held as soon as possible but within forty-five. (45) days 
after the vacancy occurs.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - REFERENDUM

 
 Upon a petition of at least thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters 
of the Tribe, any enacted or proposed resolution or ordinance of the 
Tribal Council shall be submitted to popular referendum and the vote 
shall decide whether the ordinance or resolution shall thereafter continue 
to be in effect. At least fifty-one percent (51%) of the registered voters 

shall vote in such a referendum and a 2/3 majority shall prevail. 
Prior to obtaining signatures, a copy of the proposed petition shall be 
filed with the elected Tribal Council Secretary. The petition shall not 
be valid if this copy of the petition is not first filed with the Tribal 
Council Secretary. The Tribal Council shall meet and set a time, 
.place, and date of a referendum in accordance with existing election 
procedures. Before or during the petition process, the Tribal Council 
shall furnish a list of registered voters if requested to do so.
 
 

 ARTICLE X - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. In view of the changing times, it shall be the responsibility 
of the incumbent Tribal Council to review this Constitution and Bylaws 
not less than every five (5) years and recommend changes with the 
first year beginning upon the effective date of this amendment. This, 
however, does not preclude other changes as are considered necessary 
at any time.

Sec. 2. This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the registered voters of the Tribe voting in an election called 
for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior or his representative. 
It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election 
on any proposed amendment at the request of the Tribal Council or 
upon receipt of a petition signed by twenty percent (20%) of the 
registered voters of the Tribe. At least thirty percent (30%) of those 
entitled to vote must vote in such an election; but no amendment shall 
become effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior or his authorized representative.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY

 
 Section 1. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the 
Fort Mojave Tribal Council pursuant to the previous Constitution which 
was approved on May 6, 1957, shall remain in full force and effect 
except to the extent that they are inconsistent with this Constitution.

Sec. 2. In the event that any provision of this Constitution is determined 
unconstitutional, illegal or invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, 
the remaining provisions of this Constitution shall remain in effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the 
registered voters of the Fort Mojave Tribe, voting in an election 
called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided at 
least thirty percent (30%) of those registered to vote in such election 
shall vote, and it shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, 
and if approved, shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

 
BYLAWS OF THE FORT MOJAVE TRIBE

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The Chairman of the Council shall preside over all meetings 
of the Council, shall perform all duties of a Chairman and exercise any 
authority given him specifically by the Council or by a general meeting 
of the Tribe. The Chairman shall have the power to vote.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman, in the absence of the regular Chairman, 
shall preside and shall have all powers, privileges and duties of the 
Chairman. He shall have power to vote at any meeting.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council Secretary shall have charge of all tribal 
correspondence and it shall be his duty to submit promptly to the 
Superintendent of the jurisdiction and other appropriate offices of the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, copies of all minutes of regular and special 
meetings of the Council as well as copies of all resolutions and ordinances 
adopted by the Council. If a member of the Council, he shall have power 
to vote at any meeting.

Sec. 4. The duties of the Treasurer shall be as follows:

(A)  He shall accept, receipt for, keep and safeguard all funds in 
the custody of the Council. He shall deposit all such funds as directed 
by the Fort Mojave Council and shall keep accurate records of such 
funds and shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount 
and nature of all funds in his custody to the Council at regular meetings 
and at such other times as requested by the Council. He shall not pay 
or otherwise disburse any funds in custody of the Council except when 
properly authorized to do so by the Council.

(B)  The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least 
once a year by a competent auditor employed by the Council, and at 
such other times as the Council may direct.

(C)  The Treasurer shall be required to give a surety bond satisfactory 
to the Council and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his authorized 
representative.

(D)  All checks shall be signed by the Treasurer and shall be counter
signed by the Chairman of the Council or by some other officer designated 
by the Council.

(E)  If the Treasurer is a member of the Council, he shall have the 
power to vote at any meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. At the first meeting of the Council after a regular election, 
which shall be the first Saturday after election, new members of the 
Council will be inaugurated and take office, and the Council shall see 
that all council members have a correct and clear understanding of the 
Constitution and Bylaws and the management of tribal and reservation 
affairs, as well as the rules for conduct of their own body.

Sec. 2. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held as designated in 
a resolution by the Tribal Council. Such designation shall follow as close 
as possible to the dates and times being followed prior to the adoption 
of this Constitution.

Sec. 3. Special meetings of the Council maybe called by the Chairman 
or special meetings may be called by the Chairman upon the written 
request of three or more members of the Council. Written notice shall 
be given to each council member at least five (5) days prior to special 
meetings.

Sec. 4. (a) In the conduct of business, Roberts Rules of Order shall 
apply except when they are inconsistent with the express provisions of 
this Constitution and Bylaws. All regular meetings shall be open to all 
members of the Tribe. Tribal members may participate in the discussion 
with the consent of the Chairman.

(b)  The order of business at any regular or special meetings of the Tribal 
Council shall be as follows:

(1)  Call to Order by the Chairman

(2)  Roll Call

(3)  Reading of Minutes of last Meeting

(4)  Unfinished Business

(5)  Reports

(6)  New Business

(7)  Adjournment
 
 

 
 
 (c)  Voting at the council meetings may be by voice, but at the discretion 
of the Chairman, or upon the request of any two members of the Council, 
a secret vote may be taken.

Sec. 5. Matters of business for the Council shall be decided by a 
majority vote. A quorum (a number competent to transact business) 
of the Council shall be four (4.) or more members, which may include 
the Chairman or Vice-Chairman. 

.

Sec. 6. No council member shall vote on any matter coming before the 
Council in which he has a personal interest or in which he or she would 
be personally enriched by the outcome of the vote, unless special consent 
is given by a majority vote of the remaining council members.

Sec. 7. Each official, elected or appointed shall take an oath of office 
prior to assuming his duties, which shall be: "l_____ (Name)_____________  

do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution

of the United States against all enemies, that I will carry out faithfully 
and impartially, the duties of my office to the best of my ability, that 
I will cooperate, promote, and protect the best interests of my Tribe in 
accordance with this Constitution and Bylaws."
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEETINGS OF THE TRIBE

 
 The Council may from time to time call meetings of all voters of the 
Tribe for the purpose of receiving reports. A general tribal meeting 
shall be held at least once a year at the time of the nomination of 
councilmen.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on July 26, 

, 1976, the

attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Fort Mojave Indian Tribe, 

adopted 

was duly rejected by a vote of 64 for, and 23 against, 

in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 133_____  

(number)

persons entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 

of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended by the Act of June 15, 1935, (40 Stat. 378).

' 
. 

William J. Lawrence
Chairman, Election Board

Claude Lewis 
Election Board Member

Iris Ramos
Election Board Member
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I, BEN REIFEL, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the 

authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to me by 

230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve the foregoing Constitution and 

Bylaws of the Fort Mojave Indian Tribe.

s/ BEN REIFEL
Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: January 7, 1977

