 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE

FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY

OF THE FORT BIDWELL

RESERVATION

CALIFORNIA


 
 APPROVED JANUARY 28, 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE FORT BIDWELL
INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE FORT BIDWELL
RESERVATION OF CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We, the Paiute Indians of the Fort Bidwell Reservation, in order 
to establish a legal community organization and secure certain privi
leges and powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization Act, do 
ordain and establish this constitution and by-laws for the Fort Bid
well Indian Community,

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community shall 
extend to the territory within the confines of the Fort Bidwell Res
ervation and to all lands which may be added thereto under any law 
of the United States except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership
Section 1. The membership of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com

munity shall consist of all persons of Indian blood whose names 
appear on the official census rolls as of April 1, 1935; and all chil
dren born to any member of the community who is a resident of the 
reservation at the time of the birth of said children.

Sec. 2. No Indian or Indian family shall be permitted to have 
permanent residence on this reservation except those to whom houses 
have been assigned.

Sec. 3. Visits from relatives or friend of those having residence 
on the reservation shall be permitted but shall be limited to 11 days 
at any one time and shall not exceed 30 days in any one calendar 
year.

Sec. 4. If it appears advisable to extend the time allotted to visi
tors in any particular case it may be done through an affirmative 
vote of the entire business committee of the general community 
council.

Article III-—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com
munity shall be the general community council which shall be com
posed of all the qualified voters of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com
munity, A majority of the qualified voters shall constitute a quorum.
Sec. 2. The general community council shall elect from its own 
members by secret ballot a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary, a 
treasurer and such other officers and committees as may be deemed 
necessary.

Sec. 3. The general community council shall meet on the first Mon

day of January and July.

Sec. 4. Within thirty days after the ratification and approval of 
this constitution and by-laws, a general community council shall be 
held for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it may 
transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers 
named at this meeting shall serve until the next July meeting at 
which time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall 
be chosen annually at the July meeting.
Sec. 5. The chairman, or 25 per cent of the qualified voters may, 
by written notice, call special meetings of the general community 
council.

Sec. 6. The business committee shall consist of the chairman, vice- 
chairman, and treasurer of the general community council, and Chief 
Charlie Washoe Johnnie.

Article IV—Powers of the General Community Council

Section 1. The general community council shall exercise the fol
lowing powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes, 
or the Constitution of the United States, and subject further to all 
express restrictions upon such powers contained in this constitution 
and the attached by-laws.

(a)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and the fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior;

(b)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 
lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets without the consent of 
the Indians;
 (c) To negotiate with the Federal. State, and local governments;
(d) To manage all tribal economic affairs and enterprises of the 
Fort Bidwell Reservation in accordance with the terms of a charter 
that may be issued to the Fort Bid-well Indian Community by the 
Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. The general community council shall advise the Secretary 
of the Interior concerning all appropriation estimates of Federal 
projects for the benefit of the community, prior to the submission of 
such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

 Sec. 3. The general community council shall have power to make 
regulations governing the direction of communal labor and enter
prises; to arrange with individuals for their parts therein, and to 
conscript labor in emergencies: to fix rates of compensation for labor 
in the community; to regulate the division of profits, and the conser
vation of an operating fund.

Sec. 4. Any of the foregoing powers may be delegated to the 
business committee or other officials of the general community 
council.

Sec. 5. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Paiute 
Indians of the Fort- Bidwell Reservation, but not expressly referred 
to in this constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may 
be exercised by the people of the Fort Bidwell Indian community 
through the adoption and approval of by-laws and such amendments 
as may be found necessary.

Article V—Land

Section 1. The unallotted lands of the Fort Bidwell Reservation 
and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by or for the Fort 
Bidwell Indian community shall be held as community lands 
forever.

Sec. 2. The general community council shall make all assignments 
of land for home and garden purposes. Any member of the com
munity who has received an assignment may hold, use, and enjoy 
life tenure. The general community council shall have the power to 
revoke an assignment for non-use at any time. Reasonable notice of 
the intent of revocation shall be given the assignee who shall hare 
the right to a hearing.

Sec. 3. At the death of an assignee, legal heirs shall be given 

preference, in the reassignments of the land.

Sec. 4. Any member of the community in good standing is entitled 
to an assignment of land for home and garden. The amount of 
such assignment shall be based upon a calculation of the amount 
and quality of the land available for assignment, the number of 
applicants and dependents in each family.

Sec. 5. Community land may be leased to individual members or 
associations of members of the community at, a price per acre fixed 
by the council and for a definite period of time. The proceeds from 
such leases shall be deposited in the treasury of the Fort Bidwell 
Indian community and used for the benefit of said community.

Article VI—Amendments

Section 1. Amendments to the constitution and by-laws may be 
ratified and approved in the same manner as this constitution and 
by-laws.

Say 2. Whenever eight members of the general comunity coun
cil shall consider an amendment necessary, such amendment shall 
be duly approved by eight or more members of the council and sent 
to the Secretary of the Interior. It shall then be the duty of the 
Secretary of the Interior to call an election. If at such election the 
amendment is adopted by a majority of the qualified voters of the 
community voting therein and if at least thirty-percent (30%) of 
those entitled to vote shall vote in such election. such amendment 
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior and if approved 
by him, shall thereupon take effect.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE FORT 
BIDWELL RESERVATION OF CALIFORNIA

 
 Article I. Each member of the business committee and each offi
cer and subordinate officer, elected or appointed hereunder, shall 
take an oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which 
oath he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitu
tion of the United States and this constitution and by-laws.

(Oath) : "I, ______________, do solemnly swear that I will faith
fully support the Constitution of the United States and the consti
tution and by-laws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community, and that

in all measures which may come before me I will so conduct myself 
for the best interests and prosperity of the Fort Bidwell Indians.”
Art. II. It shall be the duty of the chairman of the general com
munity council to preside at all meetings of the council and to 
carry out all orders of the council. The chairman of the council 
shall also preside at the general community meetings. The chair
man shall also be the chief executive officer of the community.

Art. III. The vice-chairman shall discharge the duties of the 
office of the chairman of the general community council in the ab
sence or disability of the chairman of the council, or when called 
upon by him to do so.

Art. IV. The secretary of the general community council shall 
keep a full report of all proceedings of each regular and special 
meeting of the general community council and of the business com
mittee, and shall perform such other duties of like nature as the 
general community council shall from time to time by resolution 
provide. He shall transmit copies of the minutes of each meeting 
to the superintendent of the Sacramento Indian Agency through 
the agent in charge. The secretary shall also attend to the corre
spondence of the general community council and its business com
mittee under the direction of the chairman of the general com
munity council. He shall at all times maintain an accurate record 
of the community membership.

Art. V. The treasurer of the general community council shall be 
the custodian of all moneys which come under the jurisdiction or 
into the control of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council. 
He shall pay out money in accordance with the orders and resolu
tions of the council. He shall keep account of all receipts and dis
bursements and shall report the same to the council at each regular 
meeting. He shall give a bond, approved by the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs, in such amount as the council may by resolution 
approve. The books of the council treasurer shall be subject to 
audit or inspection at the direction of the council. Until the treas
urer is bonded, the business committee may make such provision
for the custody and disbursements of funds as shall guarantee their 
safety and proper disbursement and use.

Art. VI. The subordinate officers or members of committees shall 
perform such duties as the general community council by resolution 
shall from time to time provide.

Art. VII. The officers of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community 
may receive such compensation as may be determined by the gen
eral community council, from such funds as may be available.

Art. VIII. The order of business at any regular or special meeting 

of the council shall be as follows:

1.  Council called to order.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the council treasurer.
6.  Unfinished business.
7.  Few business.
8.  Adjournment.

Art. IX. Ratification of constitution and by-laws.—'This consti
tution and by-laws. when adopted by a majority vote of the voters 
of the Fort Bidwell Indian Reservation voting at a special election 
called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least thirty 
percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in force 
from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved December 2, 1035, by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was submitted 
for ratification to the adult Indian residents of the Fort Bidwell 
Reservation and was on December 21, 1935, duly ratified by a vote of 
15 for and 14 against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 
16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 
as amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (Pub., No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Simon Hawley, 

Chairman of Election Board.

Ray Townsend, 

Secretary of Election Board.

Roy Nash, 

Superintendent In Charge of the Reservation.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and by-laws of the Fort Bidwell Indian 
Community.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Allairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution 
and by-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended January 16, 1936:

John Collier,

 Commissioner of Indian, Affairs.

Washington, D. C., January 28. 1936.

Charles West, 

Acting Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

AMENDMENTS—CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE
 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE FORT
BIDWELL RESERVATION

 
 Amendment I.

1.  That the words “first Monday of January and July” in Section 3, 

Article III of the Constitution and By-laws be changed to read :
“first Thursday of November and April."

2.  That the word “July” in the last line of Section 4, Article III of 

the Constitution and By-laws be changed to read:
“November”.
Amendment II.

That an article be added to the Constitution as follows:

“Article VII—Vacancies and Removal From Office

“Section 1. Any officer who may resign, die, or be removed from 
office, shall be replaced only at a regular election or at a special election 
of the Community Council.

“Section 2. Any officer convicted of a felony or misdemeanor in
volving dishonesty in any Federal. State or Indian Court may be re
moved from office by a majority vote of the eligible voters of the 
Community Council.

“Section 3. The Community Council may, by a majority vote of 
the eligible voters, expel any officer of the Council for neglect of duty 
or gross misconduct: Provided. That the accused shall be given an 
opportunity to answer any and all charges at a designated Council 
meeting. The decision of the Council shall be final.”
Amendment III.

That Article IV be amended by adding Section 6:
“Section 6. (a) The general community council shall have the right 
to promulgate ordinances relative to the admission of new members 
to the Fort Bidwell Community Council.
 “(b) The general community council shall have the right to pro
mulgate ordinances prohibiting nonresident members of the Fort Bid
well Community from voting at general community council meetings; 
Provided, That any resident of the Fort Bidwell Reservation, who 
acquired membership under Article II, Section 1, shall at all times 
have the right to vote.”
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved April 13, 1940, by the Assistant Sec
retary of the Interior, the attached Amendments to the Constitution 
and By-laws for the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell
 
 

C
P

,

 
 
 Reservation, were submitted for ratification to the qualified voters 
of the Community, and on June 8, 1940, Amendment No. 1 was adopted 
by a vote of 18 for, and 0 against; Amendment No, 2 was adopted by a 
vote of 17 for, and 1 against; and Amendment No. 3 was adopted by a 
vote of 18 for, and 0 against in an election in which more than 30 
per cent of those entitled to vote cast (heir ballots in accordance with 
section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 
984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Connan Dick, 

Chairman, Community Council.

Roy Nash, 

Superintendent, Sacramento Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
Act of June 18. 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Amendments to the Constitution and By-laws of the Fort 
Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell Reservation.

Approval recommended July 10, 1940.

F. H. Daiker.

Assistant to the Commissioner.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary.

[seal]

Washington, D, C., July 12, 1940.


AMENDMENT CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE FORT
BIDWELL RESERVATION


Amendment IV.

1.  Section 4, Article II, Membership, shall be amended to read:
"Sec. 4. If it appears advisable to extend the time allotted to 
visitors in any particular case, it may lie done through an affirmative 
vote of the Community Council."

2.  Article 111, Governing Body, shall be amended to read:
"Section 1. The governing body of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com
munity shall consist of a council known as the Fort Bidwell Indian 
Community Council.

"Sec. 2. The Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council shall be 
composed of nine councilmen elected by secret ballot at the regular 
November meeting.

"Sec. 3. The Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council so elected, 
shall elect from its own membership a chairman, vice-chairman and 
a secretary-treasurer. Five councilmen shall constitute a quorum. 
The Council shall appoint, from among its own membership or the 
Community, such other officers or committees as may be deemed 
necessary.

“Sec. 4. Councilmen shall hold office for a term of two years or 

until their successors are elected, except as hereinafter provided.

"Sec. 5. The Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council shall hold 
 two regular meetings with the community as a whole at which lime 
they will make a report, to the general community of their activities 
for the previous six months. The meetings will be held on the first 
Thursday of November and April.

“Sec. 6. The chairman, or 25 percent of the qualified voters of the 
community may, by written notice, call special meetings of the 
council."

3. Article VI, Amendments, Section 2 shall be amended to read:
“Sec. 2. At any regular or special meeting of the Fort Bidwell 
Indian Community Council, amendments to this constitution and 
by-laws may be proposed and acted upon; if approved by a majority 
vote at such meeting the proposed amendment shall be submitted to 
the Secretary of the Interior who shall thereupon call an election on 
the proposed amendment."

4.  Add a new article to read as follows:

"Article VIII— Nominations and Elections

"Section 1. Councilmen shall be nominated and elected at the 
regular November general meeting of the Community at which at 
least 30 percent of the eligible voters shall be present. To be eligible 
for nomination, a candidate must have reached his or her twenty-first 
birthday and be a regularly qualified member of the Community.
 
 

 
 
 “Sec. 2. The five members of the Council receiving the highest 
vote at the November 1942 election shall hold office for two years; 
the four receiving the lowest vote shall bold office for a period of one 
year; thereafter vacancies shall be filled at annual elections held at 
the regular November meeting.

“Sec. 3. Any member of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community 
who is twenty-one years of age or over, on the dale of election, and 
who has maintained legal residence on the. Fort Bidwell Reservation 
shall be entitled to vote.”

5.  Wherever the word "general" appears in the constitution and 

by-laws before the word “community”, it shall be eliminated.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved December 18. 1911, by the Assisi
ant Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment IV to the 
Constitution and By-laws for the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of 
the Fort Bidwell Reservation, California, was submitted for ratifica
tion to the qualified voters of the Community, and on February 4, 
1942, was ratified by a vote of 21 for, and 7 against, in an election in 
which more than 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots 
in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 
(49 Sint. 378).

John G. Rockwell,

Field Representative in Charge, Sacramento Agency.

Herman Townsend, 
Chairman, Community Council.

I,  W. C. Mendenhall, the Acting Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 
me by the Act of June IS. 1934 (4S Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Amendment IV to the Constitution and By
laws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell 
Reservation.

Approval recommended: February 24. 1942.
J. C. McCaskill, 

Assistant to the Commissioner.

W. C. Mendenhall.
Acting Assistant Secretary. 

[seal] 
Washington, D. C., May 6, 1942.
 
  
  
  
 

 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of  
 

CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT V

 
 ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP, shall be amended in its entirety to read 
as follows:

Section 1. Membership with the Fort Bidwell Indian Community 
shall consist of those persons who qualify under one of the 
following categories:

(a)  All persons of the community whose names appear on 
the Official Census Roll, dated April 1, 1934.

(b)  All children born between April 1, 1934, and the 

effective date of this amendment to any member of 
the community.

(c)  All children of one-fourth (1/4) or more degree of 

Indian blood born on or after the effective date of 
this amendment to members of the Fort Bidwell Indian 

 Community.

(d)  Admission to membership through adoption shall be 
governed by an ordinance enacted by the governing 
body and approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. If a person who meets the above eligibility require
ments has been allotted on another reservation or public 

 domain land or is a recognized member of another tribe, band, 
or group of Indians or has relinquished membership in the 
Fort Bidwell Indian Community, such person shall be disquali
fied for membership. However, an allotment or an interest in 
 an allotment acquired through will, gift, deed, or inheritance 

shall not be a bar to membership. A "recognized member of 
some other tribe, band or group" is a person who has been 
listed on a membership roll, received a land use assignment, 
or otherwise shared in the benefits accorded to the Indians 
of another reservation.

Sec. 3. The governing body shall adopt an enrollment ordinance 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
prescribing rules and procedures by which the initial member
ship roll shall be prepared and thereafter kept current. Any 
person denied membership shall have the right of appeal to 
the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to 25 CFR, Part 42.

Sec. 4. Corrections may be made to the roll at any time by 
the Fort Bidwell Community Council, subject to approval by 
the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 1971, under 

delegated authority, the attached Amendment No. V to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell 

Reservation of California was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the community and was on May 22, 1971, 

duly adopted

by a vote of 27 for, and 0 against, in an election in 

which at least 30 percent of the 34 members entitled to vote

cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
  
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of  
 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT VI

 
 ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY, Section 3 of the constitution, the 
first sentence shall be amended to read:

The Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council, so elected, shall 
elect from its own membership a chairman, vice-chairman, 
secretary and a treasurer,

ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY, Section 6 of the constitution, shall 
be amended in its entirety to read: 
.

The chairman may, by written notice, call special meetings of 
the council or community. Upon petition, signed by not less 
than twenty-five percent (25%) of the eligible voters of the 
community, submitted to the chairman or secretary of the 
council, the chairman shall call a community meeting for the 
purpose of (a) voting to rescind enactments of the council, 
(b) voting to terminate actions of the council in the proposal 
stage, (c) voting on proposals by the community at large.
Such meetings shall be publicly noticed at least fifteen (15) 
days in advance of the meeting. To be officially recognized, 
such elections and meetings must be participated in by at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters of the 
community.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 1971, under

delegated authority, the attached Amendment No. VI to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell 

Reservation of California was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the community and was on May 22, 1971, duly adopted 

by a vote of 26 for, and 1 against, in an election in 

which at least 30 percent of the 34 members entitled to

vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
  
  
  
 

 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of 
 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT VII

 
 ARTICLE IV - POWERS OF THE COMMUNITY COUNCIL, Section 1(d) of the 
constitution shall be amended in its entirety to read:

(d)  To manage all land, property, community enterprises, and 
economic affairs of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community in 
conformity with applicable law, including but not limited 
to the establishment of housing or rental authorities, 
loan programs, and approval of planning, programming and 
development projects of all community lands and assets.

ARTICLE IV, Section 1 of the constitution, shall be amended by 
adding a new subsection (e) to read as follows:

(e)  To appropriate community funds which are on deposit in 

the local treasury, and to use such funds for the benefit 
of the community, and to authorize the appropriation and 
use of community trust funds which are on deposit in the 
United States Treasury.

ARTICLE IV, Section 4 of the constitution, shall be deleted in its 
entirety.

ARTICLE IV, Section 5 of the constitution shall now become Section 4 
and shall be amended to read as follows:

 Sec. 4. Any rights and powers vested in Paiute Indians of
 the Fort Bidwell Indian Community which are not expressly 
referred to in this article shall not be abridged by this 
article, but may be exercised by the community council 
through the enactment of appropriate constitutional amendments.

ARTICLE IV, Sections 6(a) and (b) shall be deleted.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 1971, under 

delegated authority, the attached Amendment No. VII to the 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of 

the Fort Bidwell Reservation of California was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the community and was on May 22,

1971 duly adopted by a vote of 20 for, and 7 against, 

in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 34 members 

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 

of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended by the Act of June IS, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board
 
  
  
  
 

 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of 
 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT VIII

 
 ARTICLE V - LAND, of the constitution, shall be amended in its 
entirety to read as follows:

Section 1. The community council shall make all assignments 
of land in accordance with an ordinance approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. Community lands may be leased by tie community 
council with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 1971, under 

delegated authority, the attached Amendement No. VIII to the

Constitution and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of 

the Fort Bidwell Reservation of California was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the community and was on May 22,

1971, duly adopted by a vote of 21 for, and 6 against, 

in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 34 members

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16

of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984),

as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
  
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of 
 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT IX

 
 ARTICLE VII - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICES, Sections 1, 2 
and 3 of the constitution, shall be amended by deleting the word 
"Council" after "Community." Section 3 shall be amended further 
by substituting the word "Community" for "Council."
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 1971, under 

delegated authority, the attached Amendment No. IX to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell 

Reservation of California was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the community and was on May 22, 1971, duly adopted

by a vote of 23 for, and 4 against, in an election in

which at least 30 percent of the 34 members entitled to 

vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board
 
  
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of 
 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT X

 
 ARTICLE VIII - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS, Section 3 of the 
constitution, shall be amended in its entirety to read:

Sec. 3. Any enrolled member of the Fort Bidwell Indian 
Community, who is twenty-one (21) years of age or over and is 
a legal resident of the reservation or is registered to 
vote, shall be entitled to vote. Registration and voting 
procedures, including absentee voting, shall be established 
by the council.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 197I, under 

delegated authority, the attached Amendment No. X to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell 

Reservation of California was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the community and was on May 22, 1971, duly adopted

by a vote of 27 for, and 0 against, in an election in

which at least 30 percent of the 34 members entitled to 

vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Election Board Member

Election Board Member
 
  
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of 
 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT XI

 
 ARTICLES I and V of the bylaws shall be amended by deleting from 
them "business committee" and substituting in lieu thereof "community 
council."

ARTICLE IV of the bylaws shall be amended by deleting the words 
"and of the business committee" in the first sentence.

ARTICLE IV of the bylaws shall be further amended by deleting the 
words "and its business committee" in the third sentence.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 1971, under

delegated authority, the attached Amendment No. XI to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell 

Reservation of California was submitted to the qualified voters of 

the community and was on May 22, 1971, duly adopted

by a vote of 24 for, and 3 against, in an election in

which at least 30 percent of the 34 members entitled to 

vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
  
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
FORT BIDWELL RESERVATION 

 
  
 of 
 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT XII

 
 A new Article shall be added to the constitution entitled, 
ARTICLE IX - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS, and shall read as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE IX - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Section 1. The relevant protections guaranteed by Title II of 
the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat, 77), against actions of 
a tribe in exercising its powers of self-government shall apply 
to the Fort Bidwell Indian Community.

Sec. 2. Community members shall have the right to review 
community records at any reasonable time in accordance with 
procedures established by the community council.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy Associate 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on February 4, 1971, under

delegated authority, the attached Amendment No- XII to the 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of 

the Fort Bidwell Reservation of California was submitted to the 

qualified voters of the community and was on May 22
 
 

, 

 
 1971, duly adopted by a vote of 27 for, and 0 against,

in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 34 members 

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 

of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat.. 378).
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I, Harrison Loesch, Assistant Secretary 

of the Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the 

authority granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended, do hereby approve the attached Amendments V, VI, VII, 

VIII, IX, X, XI, and XII to the Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Port Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell Reservation of 

California.

Approval Recommended:

(Sgd) Ernest Stevens

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Acting

Harrison Loesch
(sgd) 
Assistant Secretary of the Interior

 Washington, D. C.

Date: JUL 13 1971
 
 

 
 
 