HeinOnline

Citation:
George Emory Fay, Compiler %26 Editor. Charters,
Constitutions and By-Laws of the Indian Tribes of North
America (1967-1981 All Published).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Thu Jun 28 13:35:16 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device


CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE FORT MOJAVE TRIBE

OF THE FORT MOJAVE RESERVATION OF ARIZONA,

NEVADA, AND CALIFORNIA


 
  
 Approved May 6, 1957 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Fort Mojave Tribe having tribal lands in Arizona, California, and Nevada, 

in order to establish a legal Tribal Council and better exercise the privileges and 
powers of self-government, in order to use and restore our ancient home in the Mojave 
Valley of the Colorado River, and to rehabilitate ourselves and fortune after being 
dislocated by the changed conditions resulting from the construction of Hoover Dam 
and by the overflows and backwater from Parker Dam and Lake Havasu, and in general to 
improve our welfare, and to enjoy and maintain our rights and privileges as citizens 
under the Constitution and laws of the United States of America, do establish this 
Constitution and By-laws for the Indians of the Fort Mojave Indian Reservation.

ARTICLE I — STATEMENT OF PURPOSE

In our relation to the United States Government, a relation similar to that which 
a town or a county has to State and Federal Government, our own internal affairs shall 
be managed, insofar as such management does not conflict with the laws of the United 
States, by a governing body which shall be known as the Fort Mojave Tribal Council.

ARTICLE II — TERRITORY

The authority of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall extend to the following land areas: 
the so-called "Military Reserve” set aside by General Orders No. 19 of the War Depart
ment of August 4, 1870, containing approximately 5,582 acres, more or less, and the 
so-called ”Hay and Wood Reserve” also defined in said General Orders, containing ap
proximately 9,114 acres, more or less, and the so-called "School Reserve” set aside by 
Executive Order of March 18, 1903, containing approximately 7,000 acres, more or less, 
and those lands set aside pursuant to Executive Order of February 2, 1911, containing 
17,315 acres, more or less, except the acreage subsequently sold to the Metropolitan 
Water District which became inundated after the construction of Parker Dam, and fur
ther the lands totalling approximately 16 acres, more or less, comprising the Fort Mo
jave Indian Village, adjacent to the City of Needles, California, which land was pur
chased with our tribal funds, and finally to such other lands as the United States may 
acquire for the benefit of the Tribe or the Tribe may subsequently acquire for itself.

SECTION 1. The membership of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall consist of:
 
 

ARTICLE III 

MEMBERSHIP

 
 (a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census roll of 
the Fort Mojave Indians as of November 1, 1956; Provided, that within seven years af
ter the adoption and approval of this constitution, corrections may be made in said 
roll by the Tribal Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  All children of one-fourth degree or more Fort Mojave Indian blood who are 
born to resident members, and all children of one-fourth degree or more Fort Mojave 
Indian blood born to non-resident members, provided that declaration of intention 
to maintain membership of such non-resident children is submitted to the Fort Mojave 
Tribal Council within one year from the date of birth of such children. The method 
of declaring intention of membership shall be determined by ordinance of the Council.

SEC. 2. The Council shall have the power to pass ordinances, subject to review 

by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative, governing future 
membership, loss of membership, and the adoption of members by the Fort Mojave Tribe.

ARTICLE IV — GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall be known as the 

Fort Mojave Tribal Council and shall consist of seven (7) members.

SEC. 2. The first election of councilmen under the Constitution shall be held 

within 30 days following the adoption and ratification of this Constitution and By
laws, The three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall hold of
fice for three years, and two (2) candidates receiving the next highest number of 
votes shall hold office for two years, and the two (2) candidates who receive the 
next highest number of votes shall hold office for a period of one year. In each re
gular election thereafter, candidates shall be elected and shall hold office for a 
term of three years.

SEC, 3, A Council Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected immediately from 

the Council membership by the qualified voters of the Tribe at the regular election 
meetings. The officers so elected shall hold such office for a term of two years, 
except when term of Council member is less than two years then the term of the elect, 
ed officer shall not exceed that of the term as Council member. When the term of 
one of the officers is terminated before he has served two years due to termination 
of Council membership, or for other reasons, his successor will be chosen at the 
next regular meeting by the voters, the person receiving the highest number of votes 
will fill the vacant position for the full term of two years. Either the Chairman 
or Vice-Chairman may be reelected to successive terms.

SEC. 4. The Council shall choose a secretary and a treasurer from within or out

side the Council membership. The Council shall also choose such committees from 
within or without its membership as may be deemed necessary.

SEC. 5. The members of the Council shall be qualified voters, twenty—one (21) 
years of age, or over, and members of the Fort Mojave Tribe, and residents of the 
community,

SEC. 6. Members of the Council shall take office on the first day of the first 

month after their election.

ARTICLE V — POWERS OF THE COUNCIL

SECTION 1. The Fort Mojave Tribal Council shall have the following powers:

(a)  To represent the Tribe and act in all matters that concern the welfare of the 

Tribe, and to make decisions not inconsistent with or contrary to this Constitution 
and By-laws or the Constitution and statutes of the United States.

(b)  To negotiate and make contracts with the Federal, State and local Governments.

(c)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior or his representative on all activi
ties that may affect the Fort Mojave Reservation, and on all appropriation estimates 
and Federal projects for the benefit of the Tribe before such estimates and projects 
are submitted to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(d)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be sub

ject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, or his designated representa
tive so long as such approval is required by Federal law.

(e)  To veto the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, tribal 
funds or other tribal assets that may be authorized by any agency or employee of the 
government.

(f)  To protect and preserve the wildlife and natural resources of the Tribe; to 

regulate hunting and fishing on the Reservation.

(g)  To cultivate Indian arts, crafts and cultures.

(h)  To administer charity.

(i)  To regulate the uses and disposition of Tribal property and funds.

(J) To negotiate and issue leases, subject to Government approval and form, for 

business and homesite purposes.

(k)  To manage all tribal economic affairs.

(1)  To appropriate tribal funds for public purposes, and to borrow money from any 

source and pledge or assign chattels or future tribal income as security therefor; 
provided, that the total amount of indebtedness to which the Tribe may subject it
self shall not exceed $1,000 except with the express approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior,

(m)  To enact ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, gov

erning the granting of grazing leases, business leases and improvement leases.

(n)  To provide for the removal or exclusion from the reservation of any non-member 

of the Tribe whose presence may be injurious to the people of the Reservation,

(o)  To enact ordinances governing the activities of voluntary associations con

sisting of members of the Tribe organized for purposes of cooperation or other pur
poses.

(p)  To regulate its own procedures, to appoint subordinate committees, commiss
ions, boards, tribal officials and employees not otherwise provided for in this con
stitution and by-laws, and to prescribe their salaries, tenure and duties; to charter 
and regulate subordinate organizations for economic and other purposes.

(q)  The Council may exercise such further powers as may be delegated to the Fort 
Mojave Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior or by any other qualified official or 
Agency of the Government.

SEC. 2. The foregoing enumeration of powers shall not be construed to limit the 

powers of the Fort Mojave Tribe, and such powers may be exercised through the adop
tion of appropriate by-laws or constitutional amendments,

ARTICLE VI — REVIEW BY THE SECRETARY

Any resolution or ordinance which, by the terms of this constitution, is subject 

to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent 
of the reservation who shall, within twenty days of the enactment thereof, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereup
on become effective, but the Superintendent shall submit a copy of the same, bearing 
his endorsement and the date his signature was affixed thereon, to the Secretary of 
the Interior who may, within ninety days from the date of enactment, rescind the said 
ordinance or resolution for any cause by notifying the Council of such rescission. 
If the Secretary shall fail to act within the 90-day period, the ordinance or resolu
tion shall remain in effect as of the date of the Superintendent’s approval.

If the Superintendent shall refuse or fail to approve any resolution or ordinance 
submitted to him within twenty days after its enactment, he shall advise the Council 
of his reasons therefor. If these reasons appear insufficient to the Council, it 
may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the In
terior who may, within ninety days from the enactment date approve the same in writ
ing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

ARTICLE VII — RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

All members of the Fort Mojave Tribe shall be accorded equal political rights and 

equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources and activities of the 
Tribe and no person shall be denied freedom of conscience, speech, association or as
sembly, or the right to petition for the redress of grievances.

ARTICLE VIII — ELECTIONS

SECTION 1. General elections to vote for councilmen shall be held every year on 

the first Saturday in June. The voting place shall be at the Needles Tribal Vil
lage.

SEC. 2. Special elections shall be held upon call by the Tribal Council as pro

vided in Article IX, and notice of them shall be given as in the case of general or 
regular elections.

SEC. 3. All elections shall be announced by special notice posted at least thir

ty (30) days before the election at the voting places and other public places.

SEC. 4. Nominations shall be made at a general meeting of the Fort Mojave Tribe 

called for that purpose.

SEC. 5. (a) All elections shall be by secret written ballot. All tribal members, 

male or female, twenty-one years of age or over, shall be entitled to vote in any 
elections. The Council shall have power to prescribe ordinances governing the con
duct of referendums and elections for councilmen. Such ordinances shall prescribe 
the duties of the election board, procedures for casting and canvassing resident and 
non-resident ballots, method for challenging right to vote, conduct, and results of 

elections; and settlement of any election disputes.

(b) If the Tribal Council shall fail to give the appropriate notice of the elec
tion, or in case a regular election has not been held, the Secretary of the Interior, 
upon the receipt of a petition signed by at least 30 percent of the adult members of 
the Tribe, shall call such election and shall give 30 days notice, setting the time 
and place of the election.

ARTICLE IX — REMOVAL AND RESIGNATION FROM OFFICE

SECTION 1. If a member of the Council fails or refuses to attend two regular 
meetings in succession, unless excused due to illness or other causes for which he 
cannot be held responsible, or shall be convicted of a felony or a misdemeanor invol
ving moral integrity, his office shall be forfeited, and a special election called by 
the Council shall be held to replace him.

SEC. 2. If a member of the Council shall fail in the performance of the duties 
assigned him, he may be subject to recall. The Council may by a two-thirds vote, af
ter affording the accused member a fair opportunity to be heard in his own defense, 
require such member to stand for re-election in a special election called for that 
purpose.

SEC. 3. Any councilman resigning or taken by death out of office shall be re
placed at the next General Election of Councilmen. If so desired, the Council may 
fill such position by a majority vote until the time of the said election.

SEC. 4. The members of the Tribe shall have the power to remove or reinstate any 

member of the Fort Mojave Tribal Council by filing a petition with the Secretary of 
the Tribal Council, signed by at least 30 percent of the qualified voters, asking for 
the removal or reinstatement of said member of the Tribal Council; Provided, that no 
such person may be removed or reinstated except at a special election which shall be 
held within 30 days after the filing of the petition.

ARTICLE X  — REFERENDUM

Upon a petition of at least thirty percent of the eligible voters of the Tribe,or 

upon the request of the majority of the members of the Tribal Council, any enacted or 
proposed ordinance or resolution of the Tribal Council shall be submitted to popular 
referendum and the vote of the majority of the qualified voters in such referendum 
shall decide whether the ordinance or resolution shall thereafter be in effect, pro
vided, that thirty percent or more of the eligible voters shall vote in such referen
dum.

ARTICLE XI — AMENDMENTS

SECTION 1. This constitution and by-laws may be amended by a majority vote of the 

qualified voters of the tribe voting at an election called for that purpose by the 
Secretary of the Interior, provided, that at least 30 percent of those entitled to 
vote shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it 
shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any 

proposed amendment at the request of the Council, or upon receipt of a petition sign
ed by one-third of the qualified voters of the Tribe.

