 
 UNITED STATES 
 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE 


 
  
  
 fort McDowell mohave-apache  
 
COMMUNITY 

ARIZONA

 
 APPROVED NOVEMBER 24, 1986 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 


 
  
  
  
 WASHINGTON : 1937 
 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 

 
 MA? 3 1937  
 

DIVISION OF DOCUMENTS

I-

 
 MGrTAL

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE FORT McDOWELL 
 
 
MOHAVE-APACHE COMMUNITY

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the people of the Fort McDowell Band of Mohave-Apache 
Indians, in the State of Arizona, in order to improve and promote our 
general welfare and to provide means for the orderly transaction 
of tribal business and free expression of the tribal will, under the 
act of Congress granting us the authority for home rule, do ordain 
and establish this Constitution for the government of the Fort 
McDowell Mohave-Apache Community.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Commu
nity shall extend to all lands within the boundaries of the Fort Mc
Dowell Indian Reservation, established pursuant to Executive Order 
of September 15, 1903, and the act of August 23, 1904 (28 Stat. 491), 
and to such other land as may in the future be added thereto.

Article II—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Fort McDowell Mohave- 
Apache Community shall be known as the Mohave-Apache Commu
nity Council.

Sec. 2. The Council shall be composed of five members who shall 
be elected by the qualified voters of the Fort McDowell Mohave- 
Apache Community.

Sec. 3. The first election of members of the Council shall be called 
by the Secretary of the Interior within sixty days after the adoption 
and ratification of this Constitution.

Sec. 4. The Council members then elected shall agree among them
selves or draw lots so as to provide that three members of the Council 
shall serve for one year and two members for two years.

Sec. 5. Thereafter members of the Council shall serve for two years, 
three to be elected at the end of the first year and two members the 
following year.

Sec. 6. The election of the Council shall be held each year on the 
same month and day of the first election, or if such date falls on Sun
day or legal holiday then, on the following day.

Sec. 7. The Council shall at its first meeting elect from within its 
membership a President and Vice-President, and, from within or out
side of its own membership, a Secretary and Treasurer.

Article III—Membership in the Community

Section 1. All persons whose names appear on the Fort McDowell 
Indian Reservation census roll of 1934 shall be members of the Community 

 provided that corrections may be made in this roll by the 
Community Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Inte
rior, within two years after the approval of this Constitution.

Sec. 2. All descendants of members shall be entitled to membership 
in the Community if they are of at least one-quarter (1/4) degree of 
Indian blood.

Sec. 3. Any person of Indian blood who has resided within the Fort 
McDowell Indian Reservation for at least three years and whose name 
does not appear on any other reservation roll may be granted member
ship in the Community by a majority vote of the Council and upon 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Article IV—Powers of the Council

Section 1. Powers not subject to review.—The Fort McDowell 
Mohave-Apache Community Council shall exercise the following pow
ers subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or by the Consti
tution of the United States and subject further to all expressed restric
tions upon such powers contained in this Constitution.

(a)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of Com
munity lands, interests in lands, or other Community assets without 
the consent of the Community.

(b)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments on 

behalf of the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Community.

(c)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees 

to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior and Congress of its 
wishes with regard to Federal projects or appropriations for the bene
fit of the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Community.

(e)  To appoint subordinate boards and officers and prescribe their 

duties and powers.

(f)  To regulate its own procedure.
(g)  To provide for the manner of conducting elections.
(h)  To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Com

munity.

(i)  To pass ordinances or resolutions incidental to the exercise of 

any of the foregoing powers.

Sec. 2. Powers subject to review.—The Fort McDowell Mohave- 
Apache Community Council shall likewise exercise the following 
powers subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(a)  To remove or exclude from the territory of the Community 
non-members whose presence may be injurious to the peace, health 
or welfare of the Community.

(b)  To levy dues, fees, and taxes on members of the Community 
and non-members residing within the reservation, and to require 
members of the Community to contribute labor for public work and 
enterprises.

(c)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 

mental incompetents.
 (d) To administer all Community lands and Community property.
(e)  To establish and regulate subordinate organizations for busi

ness purposes.

(f)  To appropriate money out of available Community funds for 
salaries of Community officials and for other expenses of public 
business.

(g) To recommend the appropriation of tribal and other funds 

within the control of Congress or of the Secretary of the Interior.

(h)  To lay down criminal and civil codes of ordinances govern
ing the conduct of members of the Community and non-member 
Indians of the Community.

(i) To establish a Community court.
Sec. 3. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which, by 
the terms of this Constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the reser
vation, who shall, within two weeks (14 days) thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secre
tary of the Interior, who may, within ninety days from the date of 
enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, 
by notifying the Mohave-Apache Community Council of such 
rescission.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within two weeks (14 days) after its 
enactment, he shall advise the Mohave-Apache Community Council 
of his reasons therefor. If these reasons appear to the Council in
sufficient, it may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolu
tion to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety days 
from the date of its enactment, approve the same in writing, where
upon the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

Sec. 4. Future powers.—The Fort. McDowell Mohave-Apache Com
munity Council may exercise such powers as may in the future be 
delegated to the Community by the Secretary of the Interior, or by 
any other duly authorized official or agency of the government.

Sec. 5. Reserved powers.—Any rights and any powers heretofore 
vested in the Fort McDowell Band of Mohave-Apache Indians shall 
not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the people 
of the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Community through the 
adoption of appropriate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Article V—Elections

Section 1. Right of suffrage.—All adult members of the Com
munity, male or female; who have attained the age of twenty-one 
(21) years and have resided on the Fort McDowell Indian Reserva
tion for a period of six months immediately preceding the election 
shall have the right to vote in any election held under this Consti
tution.

Sec. 2. Manner of making nominations.—The manner of making 
nominations and holding elections shall be determined by appropriate 
ordinances or by-laws.

Sec. 3. Vacancies.—When a Councilman is removed for cause, or 
resigns, or otherwise ceases to hold office, the Community shall elect 
a successor at a special election called by the Community Council, to

be held within thirty (30) days after the occurrence of the vacancy. 
The said successor shall hold office until the expiration of the regular 
term of his or her predecessor whose place he or she has taken.

Article VI—Suspension From Office

Section 1. Suspension from office.—Any public official of the Fort 
McDowell Mohave-Apache Community who is indicted in a Federal 
or State court or convicted in an Indian court of bribery or any other 
serious offense, shall automatically be suspended from office. The 
remaining members of the Council shall investigate and judge 
whether the crime is serious enough to justify impeachment proceed
ings or whether the suspended official should be reinstated.

Sec. 2. Impeachment.—Any public official of the Fort McDowell 
Mohave-Apache Community who is proven guilty of improper con
duct or gross neglect of duty may be expelled by a majority vote of 
the Community Council voting in favor of such expulsion, provided 
that the accused member shall be given full and fair opportunity 
to reply to any and all charges at a designated Council meeting. It 
is further stipulated that any such member shall be given a written 
statement of the charges against him or her at least five days before 
the meeting at which he or she is to appear.

Where the Council is sitting for impeachment purposes, all parties 

shall be under oath or affirmation.

Sec. 3. Recall.—(a) Every person elected to a Community office 
by Indians of the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Conununity is 
subject to recall from such office by the qualified voters of the Com
munity. Such number of said voters as shall equal forty per centum 
of the number of votes cast at the last preceding general election may, 
by petition, which shall be known as a “Recall Petition”, demand his 
or her recall.

(b)  Every recall petition must contain a general statement, in not 
more than two-hundred words, of the grounds of such demand and 
must be filed at the office of the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache 
Community Council. Each signer of such recall petition must add 
to his or her signature the date of his or her signing the said peti
tion. The person circulating such petition must make and subscribe 
an oath on each sheet that the signatures thereon are genuine.

(c)  If said officer offers his or her resignation it shall be accepted. 
If he or she does not resign within ten (10) days after a recall peti
tion is filed, a special election shall be ordered held, not less than 
twenty or more than thirty days after such order, to determine 
whether such officer be recalled. On the ballots at said election shall 
be printed the reasons as set forth in the petition, and, in not more 
than the same number of words, the officer’s justification of his or 
her course in office. He or she shall continue to hold office until the 
result of the said election shall be officially declared.

(d)  No recall petition shall be circulated more than thirty days, 
and shall be filed at the office of the Mohave-Apache Community 
Council ten days thereafter.

Sec. 4. Removal of appointed officials.—Any officer or board ap
pointed by the Mohave-Apache Community Council may be removed 
or discharged by a majority vote of the Council. Any such officials 
shall be removed for cause only.

Article VII—Referendum

At least twenty percent of the qualified voters of the Fort McDowell 
Mohave-Apache Community on petition shall have the right to de
mand a referendum on any enacted or proposed ordinance or reso
lution of the Mohave-Apache Community Council, the vote of the 
majority of the qualified voters in such referendum to be conclusive 
and binding on the Council.

Article VIII—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Fort McDowell Mohave-Apache Com
munity voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary 
of the Interior provided that at least thirty percent of those entitled 
to vote shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall become 
effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call 
an election on any proposed amendment at the request of the Council.

BY-LAWS OF THE FORT McDOWELL MOHAVE-APACHE COMMUNITY

Article I—Duties of the Officers

Section 1. President.—The President of the Mohave-Apache 
Community Council shall preside at Council meetings, and shall be 
the chairman and direct all Council meetings and perform such 
other duties as the Council may prescribe.

Sec. 2. Vice-President.—The Vice-President shall perform the 
duties of the President in the absence or incapacity of the President.
Sec. 3. Secretary.—The Secretary shall be the recording and cor
responding Secretary and shall keep an accurate record of all matters 
transacted at Council meetings.

Sec. 4. Treasurer.—The Treasurer shall have the custody of all 
money that may come under the jurisdiction of the Mohave-Apache 
Community Council, and shall keep an accurate record as to receipt 
and distribution thereof, and shall furnish such bond as the Council, 
with the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, may 
require.

Article II—Qualifications of Office

Section. 1. No person shall be elected to the Council unless he or 
she shall be a member of the Community over the age of twenty- 
one (21) years and shall have been a resident of the Fort McDowell 
Indian Reservation at least six months immediately preceding the 
election. Any member of the Mohave-Apache Community Council 
who is affiliated with any organization or individual, not a member 
of the Community, shall not vote upon any matters in which such 
organization or individual has a pecuniary interest, and shall have 
no vote in matters where any close relative has interest, if in the 
judgment of the Council, such affiliation shall render him incapable 
of openly, freely and fearlessly working for the best interests and 
welfare of the Indians of the Fort McDowell Indian Reservation.

Article III—Election Procedure

Section 1. In case an election is due it shall be the duty of the 
Community Council to post notices at least thirty days prior to the 
date of such election, naming the date on which said election is to be 
held, and all elections shall be held at the Community building, which 
place shall be within the Fort McDowell Indian Reservation. Ten 
days after notification the Community Council shall call a meeting 
for nomination of candidates.

On the date and at the place named, the legal voters of the Reserva
tion shall assemble and one of the Council shall act as temporary 
Chairman. At once, a permanent Chairman shall be chosen and three 
tellers who shall be officers and judges of election.

The assembled legal voters of the Fort McDowell Indian Reserva
tion shall then proceed to transact the business for which they have 
been assembled. Nomination shall be the thing in order. This hav
ing been completed, and the nominations having been declared closed, 
the meeting shall be dismissed. The election shall take place not less 
than twenty days later, the wishes of the voters being ascertained by 
means of a secret ballot. The polls shall open at 9 a. m. and close at 
2 p. m. the same day. The nominees receiving the largest number of 
votes cast shall be declared elected. The newly elected members shall 
be furnished with a certificate of election, to be signed by the perma
nent Chairman and the three tellers.

Sec. 2. Validity of election.—The Superintendent of the Reserva
tion shall be the judge of the validity and authenticity of the certifi
cates of election presented to him.

Article IV—Conduct of Council Meetings

Section 1. Regular council meetings.—The regular meetings of 

the Council shall be held on the first Tuesday of each month.

Sec. 2. Special council meetings.—Special meetings of the Council 
may be held at the call of the President or on application of three 
members, due notice being given to all members at least three days 
before such meeting.

Sec. 3. Quorum.—A majority of the members of the Council, one 
of whom shall be the President or the Vice-President or the Secretary 
shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business. ’

Article V—Adoption of Constitution

This Constitution and the attached By-laws, when adopted by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Fort McDowell Band of 
Mohave-Apache Indians voting at a special election called by the 
Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 30 percent of those entitled 
to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior 
for his approval, and shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved August 18, 1936, by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was submitted 
for ratification to the members of the Fort McDowell Band of

Mohave-Apache Indians of the Fort McDowell Reservation and was 
on October 3, 1936, duly adopted by a vote of 61 for and 1 against in 
an election in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast 
their ballots in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganiza
tion Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the act of 
June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Charles Dickens, 
Chairman of Election Board.

Guy Patrick, 
Secretary of the Election Board.

A. E. Robinson.

Superintendent.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached constitution and by-laws of the Fort McDowell Mohave- 
Apache Community.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
by-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to the Fort McDowell Band 
of Mohave-Apache Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended November 13, 1936

John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., November 24, 1936.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

