 
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE  
 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
OF THE FORT BIDWELL 
RESERVATION

CALIFORNIA


 
 APPROVED JANUARY 28, 1936 
 

AMENDMENT CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE 
FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE FORT 
BIDWELL RESERVATION


Amendment IV.

1.  Section 4, Article II, Membership, shall be amended to read:
“Sec. 4. If it appears advisable to extend the time allotted to 
visitors in any particular case, it may be done through an affirmative 
vote of the Community Council."

2.  Article III, Governing Body, shall be amended to read:
“Section 1. The governing body of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com
munity shall consist of a council known as the Fort Bidwell Indian 
Community Council.

“Sec. 2. The Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council shall be 
composed of nine councilmen elected by secret ballot at the regular 
November meeting.

“Sec. 3. The Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council so elected, 
shall elect from its own membership a chairman, vice-chairman and 
a secretary-treasurer. Five councilmen shall constitute a quorum. 
The Council shall appoint from among its own membership or the 
Community, such other officers or committees as may be deemed 
necessary.

“Sec. 4. Councilmen shall hold office for a term of two years or 

until their successors are elected, except as hereinafter provided.

“Sec. 5. The Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council shall hold 
two regular meetings with the community as a whole at which time 
they will make a report to the general community of their activities 
for the previous six months. The meetings will be held on the first 
Thursday of November and April.

“Sec. 6. The chairman, or 25 percent of the qualified voters of the 
community may, by written notice, call special meetings of the 
council.”

3.  Article VI, Amendments, Section 2 shall be amended to read:
“Sec. 2. At any regular or special meeting of the Fort Bidwell 
Indian Community Council, amendments to this constitution and 
by-laws may be proposed and acted upon; if approved by a majority 
vote at such meeting the proposed amendment shall be submitted to 
the Secretary of the Interior who shall thereupon call an election on 
the proposed amendment.”

4.  Add a new article to read as follows:

“Article VIII—Nominations and Elections

“Section 1. Councilmen shall be nominated and elected at the 
regular November general meeting of the Community at which at 
least 30 percent of the eligible voters shall be present. To be eligible 
for nomination, a candidate must have reached his or her twenty-first 
birthday and be a regularly qualified member of the Community.

“Sec. 2. The five members of the Council receiving the highest 
vote at the November 1942 election shall bold office for two years; 
the four receiving the lowest vote shall hold office for a period of one 
year; thereafter vacancies shall be filled at annual elections held at 
the regular November meeting.

“Sec. 3. Any member of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community, 
who is twenty-one years of age or over, on the date of election, and 
who has maintained legal residence on the Fort Bidwell Reservation 
shall be entitled to vote.”

5.  Wherever the word “general” appears in the constitution and 

by-laws before the word “community”, it shall be eliminated.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved December 18, 1941, by the Assist
ant Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment IV to the 
Constitution and By-laws for the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of 
the Fort Bidwell Reservation, California, was submitted for ratifica
tion to the qualified voters of the Community, and on February 4, 
1942, was ratified by a vote of 21 for, and 7 against, in an election in 
which more than 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots 
in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 
(49 Stat. 378).

Herman Townsend, 
Chairman, Community Council.

John G. Rockwell,

Field Representative in Charge, Sacramento Agency.

I, W. C. Mendenhall, the Acting Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 
me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Amendment IV to the Constitution and By
laws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community of the Fort Bidwell 
Reservation.

Approval recommended: February 24, 1942.
J. C. McCaskill,

Assistant to the Commissioner.

W. C. Mendenhall, 
Acting Assistant Secretary. 

[seal]
Washington, D. C., May 6, 1942.


UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 

FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY 

OF THE FORT BIDWELL 

RESERVATION 

CALIFORNIA


 
 APPROVED JANUARY 28, 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE FORT BIDWELL 
INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE FORT BIDWELL 
RESERVATION OF CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We, the Paiute Indians of the Fort Bidwell Reservation, in order 
to establish a legal community organization and secure certain privi
leges and powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization Act, do 
ordain and establish this constitution, and by-laws for the Fort Bid
well Indian Community,

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community shall 
extend to the territory within the confines of the Fort Bidwell Res
ervation and to all lands which may be added thereto under any law 
of the United States except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com
munity shall consist of all persons of Indian blood whose names
appear on the official census rolls as of April 1, 1935; and all chil
dren born to any member of the community who is a resident of the 
reservation at the time of the birth of said children.

Sec. 2. No Indian or Indian family shall be permitted to have 

 permanent residence on this reservation, except those to whom houses 
have been assigned.

Sec. 3. Visits from relatives or friends of those having residence 
on the reservation shall be permitted but shall be. limited to 14 days 
at any one time and shall not exceed 30 days in any one calendar
year.

Sec. 4. If it appears advisable to extend the time allotted to visi
tors in any particular case it may be done through an affirmative
vote of the entire business committee of the general community 
council.

Article III—Governing Body

’

Section 1. The governing body of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com

munity shall be the general community council which shall be com
posed of all the qualified voters of the Fort Bidwell Indian Com
munity. A majority of the qualified voters shall constitute, a quorum.
Sec. 2. The general community council shall elect from its own 
members by secret ballot a chairman, a vice-chairman, a secretary, a 
treasurer and such other officers and committees as may be deemed 
necessary.

1
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 2

Sec. 3. The general community council shall meet on the first Mon

day of January and July.

Seo. 4. Within thirty days after the ratification and approval of 
this constitution and by-laws, a general community council shall be 
held for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it may 
transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers 
named at this meeting shall serve until the next July meeting at 
which time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall 
be chosen annually at the July meeting.

Seo. 5. The chairman, or 25 per cent of the qualified voters may, 
by written notice, call special meetings of the general community 
council. 

...

Sec. 6. The business committee shall consist of the chairman, vice
chairman, and treasurer of the general community council, and Chief 
Charlie Washoe Johnnie.

Article IV—Powers of the General Community Council

Section 1. The general community council shall exercise the fol
lowing powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes, 
or the Constitution of the United States, and subject further to all 
express restrictions upon such powers contained in this constitution 
and the attached by-laws.

(a)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and the fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior;

(b)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 
lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets without the consent of 
the Indians;

(c)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments;
(d)  To manage all tribal economic affairs and enterprises of the 
Fort Bidwell Reservation in accordance with the terms of a charter 
that may be issued to the Fort Bidwell Indian Community by the 
Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. The general community council shall advise the Secretary 
of the Interior concerning all appropriation estimates of Federal 
projects for the benefit of the community, prior to the submission of 
such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

Sec. 3. The general community council shall have power to make 
regulations governing the direction of communal labor and enter
prises; to arrange with individuals for their parts therein, and to 
conscript labor in emergencies; to fix rates of compensation for labor 
in the community; to regulate the division of profits, and the conser
vation of an operating fund.

Sec. 4. Any of the foregoing powers may be delegated to the 
business committee or other officials of the general community 
council.

Sec. 5. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Paiute 
Indians of the Fort Bidwell Reservation, but not expressly referred 
to in this constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may 
be exercised by the people of the Fort Bidwell Indian community 
through the adoption and approval of by-laws and such amendments 
as may be found necessary.

Article V—Land

Section 1. The unallotted lands of the Fort Bidwell Reservation 
and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by or for the Fort 
Bidwell Indian community shall be held as community lands 
forever.

Sec. 2. The general community council shall make all assignments 
of land for home and garden purposes. Any member of the com
munity who has received an assignment may hold, use, and enjoy 
life tenure. The general community council shall have the power to 
revoke an assignment for non-use at any time. Reasonable notice of 
the intent of revocation shall be given the assignee who shall have 
the right to a hearing.

Sec. 3. At the death of an assignee, legal heirs shall be given 

preference in the reassignments of the land.

Sec. 4. Any member of the community in good standing is entitled 
to an assignment of land for home and garden. The amount of 
such assignment shall be based upon a calculation of the amount 
and quality of the land available for assignment, the number of 
applicants and dependents in each family.

Sec. 5. Community land may be leased to individual members or 
associations of members of the community at a price per acre fixed 
by the council and for a definite period of time. The proceeds from 
such leases shall be deposited in the treasury of the Fort Bidwell 
Indian community and used for the benefit of said community.

Article VI—Amendments

Section 1. Amendments to the constitution and by-laws may be 
ratified and approved in the same manner as this constitution and 
by-laws.

Sec. 2. Whenever eight members of the general comunity coun
cil shall consider an amendment necessary, such amendment shall 
be duly approved by eight or more members of the council and sent 
to the Secretary of the Interior. It shall then be the duty of the 
Secretary of the Interior to call an election. If at such election the 
amendment is adopted by a majority of the qualified voters of the 
community voting therein and if at least thirty percent (30%) of 
those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, such amendment 
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior and if approved 
by him, shall thereupon take effect.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE FORT BIDWELL INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE FORT 
BIDWELL RESERVATION OF CALIFORNIA

 
 Article I. Each member of the business committee and each offi
cer and subordinate officer, elected or appointed hereunder, shall 
take an oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which 
oath he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitu
tion of the United States and this constitution and by-laws.

(Oath) : “I,------------------, do solemnly swear that I will faith
fully support the Constitution of the United States and the consti
tution and by-laws of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community, and that

in all measures which may come before me I will so conduct myself 
for the best interests and prosperity of the Fort Bidwell Indians.”
Art. II. It shall be the duty of the chairman of the general com
munity council to preside at all meetings of the council and to 
carry out all orders of the council. The chairman of the council 
shall also preside at the general community meetings. The chair
man shall also be the chief executive officer of the community.

Art. III. The vice-chairman shall discharge the duties of the 
office of the chairman of the general community council in the ab
sence or disability of the chairman of the council, or when called 
upon by him to do so.

Art. IV. The secretary of the general community council shall 
keep a full report of all proceedings of each regular and special 
meeting of the general community council and of the business com
mittee, and shall perform such other duties of like nature as the 
general community council shall from time to time by resolution 
provide. He shall transmit copies of the minutes of each meeting 
to the superintendent of the Sacramento Indian Agency through 
the agent in charge. The secretary shall also attend to the corre
spondence of the general community council and its business com
mittee under the direction of the chairman of the general com
munity council. He shall at all times maintain an accurate record 
of the community membership.

Art. V. The treasurer of the general community council shall be 
the custodian of all moneys which come under the jurisdiction or 
into the control of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community Council. 
He shall pay out money in accordance with the orders and resolu
tions of the council. He shall keep account of all receipts and dis
bursements and shall report the same to the council at each regular 
meeting. He shall give a bond, approved by the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs, in such amount as the council may by resolution 
approve. The books of the council treasurer shall be subject to 
audit or inspection at the direction of the council. Until the treas
urer is bonded, the business committee may make such provision 
for the custody and disbursements of funds as shall guarantee their 
safety and proper disbursement and use.

Art. VI. The subordinate officers or members of committees shall 
perform such duties as the general community council by resolution 
shall from time to time provide.

Art. VII. The officers of the Fort Bidwell Indian Community 
may receive such compensation as may be determined by the gen
eral community council, from such funds as may be available.

Art. VIII. The order of business at any regular or special meeting 

of the council shall be as follows:
1.  Council called to order.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the council treasurer.
6.  Unfinished business.
7.  New business.
8.  Adjournment.

Art. IX. Ratification of constitution and by-laws.—This consti
tution and by-laws, when adopted by a majority vote of the voters 
of the Fort Bidwell Indian Reservation voting at a special election 
called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least thirty 
percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in force 
from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved December 2, 1935, by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was submitted 
for ratification to the adult Indian residents of the Fort Bidwell 
Reservation and was on December 21, 1935, duly ratified by a vote of 
15 for and 14 against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 
16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 
as amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (Pub., No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Simon Hawley, 

Chairman of Election Board.

Ray Townsend, 

Secretary of Election Board.

Roy Nash, 

Superintendent In Charge of the Reservation.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and by-laws of the Fort Bidwell Indian 
Community.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution 
and by-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended January 16, 1936:

John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Charles West, 

Acting Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

Washington, D. C., January 28, 1936.

