HeinOnline

Citation:
Constitution of the Guidiville Band of Pomo Indians of 
the Guidiville Rancheria (2006).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Thu Jun 28 13:52:51 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device
 
  
 

CONSTITUTION 
 
 of the  
 
GUIDIVILLE BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE GUIDIVILLE 
RANCHERIA

PREAMBLE


We, the people of the Guidiville Band of Pomo Indians of the Guidiville 
Rancheria, in order to promote our common welfare and to secure to ourselves and our 
descendants the rights, powers and privileges offered by our sovereign tribal status and 
by the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 983) as amended, and, do 
hereby preserve and affirm this sovereign tribe, and adopt this Constitution pursuant to 
that Act. The Tribe hereby proclaims and demands the full benefits of Indian tribal 
sovereignty for itself and its members for all time.

ARTICLE I:  NAME

The name of this sovereign tribe shall be the Guidiville Band of Pomo Indians of 

the Guidiville Rancheria (hereinafter, referred to as the “Tribe”).

ARTICLE II:  TERRITORY

The jurisdiction of the Tribe shall extend to all lands, water, air space, and 
resources which are held in trust or restricted status within the former boundaries of the 
Guidiville Rancheria, consistent with the terms of the decision in Scotts Valiev Band of 
Pomo Indians of the Sugar Bowl Rancheria et al. v. U.S.A.. Civil No.C-86-3660-VRW 
(N.D. Cal. 1991), and to such other lands, water, air space, and resources as have been or 
may hereinafter be acquired by the Tribe.

ARTICLE III:  MEMBERSHIP

Section 1. Membership

Subject to the provisions of this Article III, Section 2 and 3 below, the 

membership in the Tribe shall consist of the following categories:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

All persons whose names appear on the official roll of the Guidiville Band 
of Pomo Indians as of the adoption of this Constitution, attached hereto as 
Exhibit A,

All minor children bom to the persons whose names appear on the official 
roll of the Guidiville Band of Pomo Indians.

All children bom to members of the Guidiville Band of Pomo Indians after 
the effective date of this statement.

Section 2. Dual Membership

Any tribal member who relinquishes membership in the Tribe or is or becomes a 

member of another tribe or band of Indians shall be removed from the official 
membership roll for the Guidiville Band of Pomo Indians. No such person shall be 
eligible for re-admission to the Tribe.

Section 3. Membership Ordinance

The Membership Ordinance shall be consistent with the provisions of this 
Constitution and contain provisions for, but shall not be limited to the following: 
enrollment procedures, paternal paternity testing, enrollment committees, application 
forms, approval or disapproval of applications, rejection notices, appeals, corrections and 
provisions for keeping the roll current.

ARTICLE IV:  THE GOVERNING BODY

Section 1. General Membership

All members of the Tribe who are eighteen (18) years of age or older shall 

constitute the General Membership.

Section 2. Powers of General Membership

The General Membership shall exercise the powers and duties that are specifically 

set out in this Constitution, as follows, subject to any limitation imposed upon by this 
Constitution or the laws of the United States:

(a)  Adoption and Amendment of Constitution
(b)  Election, removal and recall of Tribal Council
(c)  Enactment and amendment of Election Ordinance
(d)  Enactment and amendment of Enrollment Ordinance
(e)  Referendum petitions

Section 3. Tribal Council

The governing body of the Tribe shall be the Guidiville Tribal Council.

Section 4. Tribal Council Members

The Tribal Council shall consist of a: Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary, 

Treasurer, and Member-at-Large.

Section 5. Committees

The Tribal Council shall have the authority to delegate its authority to subordinate 

boards or committees, provided that any action taken by said boards or committees shall 
be effective only when approved by the Tribal Council.

ARTICLE V:  POWERS AND RESPONSIBILITIES 
 
 

OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Powers and Responsibilities

The Guidiville Tribal Council shall have the powers and responsibilities 
hereinafter provided and as provided under the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 
1934 (48 Stat 983) as amended, subject to any limitations imposed upon such powers by 
this Constitution or by the laws of the United States. Its powers and responsibilities are:

(a) 

To consult, negotiate, contract or conclude agreements with federal, tribal, 
state, and local governments on activities, which may affect the Tribe or 
its interests,

(b) 

To employ legal counsel,

(c) 

To manage, lease or otherwise operate all unassigned Tribal property and 
to control the use of and development of all Tribal lands,

(d) 

To acquire property and to accept donations on behalf of the Tribe,

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

To charter subordinate organizations and to delegate to such organization,
or to any subordinate boards or officials of the organization, any of the 
powers enumerated in this section, reserving the right to review any action 
taken by virtue of such delegated powers.

To administer tribal assets and manage all economic affairs and 
enterprises of the Tribe,

To create tribal, federal, and state corporations and/or any other legal form 
of business entity,

To promulgate and adopt ordinances as are deemed necessary to safeguard 
the stability of the Tribal government and promote the peace, safety, 
health and general welfare of the members of the Tribe, including but not 
limited to laws governing domestic relations of Tribal members, or the 
welfare of member children as authorized by the Indian Child Welfare Act 
or other legal authority.

(i) 

(j) 

To establish or join such courts, or other dispute-resolving bodies as it 
deems necessary or appropriate,

To levy taxes and impose fees and assessments for community purposes 
on all non-members of the Tribe doing business on lands within the 
Tribe’s jurisdiction,

(k)  To waive the Tribe’s sovereign immunity for specific and limited purposes.

(1)  All powers not specifically delegated or identified in this Constitution, shall 

be reserved to the elected Tribal Council.

ARTICLE VI:  ELECTIONS

Section 1.  Eligible Voters

All enrolled members of the Tribe who are eighteen (18) years of age or older, are 

eligible voters.

Section 2.  Qualifications of Candidate

A candidate for Tribal Council must be a member of the Tribe, twenty-five (25) 

years of age or older, a resident of California, and must be a high school graduate or have 
obtained a General Education Diploma, or prior Tribal Council or Tribal Committee 
service. No person convicted of a felony shall be eligible to run for or serve on the Tribal 
Council. A person who is not eligible to be bonded for the handling of monies shall not 
be eligible to run for or serve on the Tribal Council. A person who has admitted in 
writing, or been found by a court of competent jurisdiction, to have committed theft or 
embezzlement shall not be eligible to run for or serve on the Tribal Council.

Section 3.  Voting

All elections of Tribal Council members shall be by secret ballot.

Section 4.  Tenure of Initial Tribal Council Members

The Tribal Council members in office at the time of approval of this Constitution 
shall hold office for the remainder of their terms, which shall end upon the completion of 
initial Tribal Council elections in accordance with Section 7 and 8 of this Article.

Section 5. Tenure of Tribal Council Members

Subject to Section 7 of this Article, Tribal Council members shall be elected to 
serve for a period of four (4) years and may succeed themselves as often as re-elected. 
Members shall hold office until their successors are duly elected and installed. Elections 
for Tribal Council members shall be held on the second Sunday in July, of the election 
year.

Section 6. Nominations

The time, place and manner of nominations for Tribal Council shall be specified 
in the election ordinance, adopted pursuant to Section 9 of this Article. Individuals may 
nominate themselves for the Tribal Council.

Section 7. Staggered Terms of Office

Tribal Council members’ terms of office shall be staggered, so that in one election 
cycle, the offices of Vice Chairperson and Secretary shall be held by elections, and in the 
next election cycle, two (2) years later, an election shall be held to fill the offices of 
Chairperson, Treasurer and Member-at-Large. In the first Tribal Council election to be 
held on the first July after the adoption of this Constitution in accordance with Section 5 
of this Article, the election for the four (4) year terms of office of Vice-Chairperson, and 
Secretary, shall be held and the election for the four (4) year terms of office of 
Chairperson, Treasurer and Member-at-Large will be held two (2) years later.

Section 8. Election of Tribal Council Members

In each election cycle, there shall be one ballot. The ballot shall contain a 
separate section for each office to be filled. The candidate receiving the greatest number 
of votes for each particular office shall be elected to that office.

Section 9. Election Ordinance

Subject to Sections 7 and 8 of this Article, an Election Ordinance shall be drafted 
by the Tribal Council and presented to the General Membership for enactment within one 
(1) year following the effective date of the Constitution. Such ordinance shall include but 
need not be limited to the following provisions: secret balloting, nomination and 
certification of candidates, absentee balloting and a procedure for resolving election 
disputes. The ordinance shall also include provisions for recall procedures, referendum 
elections and procedures for petitions.

ARTICLE VII:  REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

Section 1. Removal

The Tribal Council may, by four (4) affirmative votes, expel any Tribal Council 
member for neglect of duty or gross misconduct. Before any vote or expulsion is taken 
on the matter, such member or official shall be provided a written statement of the 
charges against him at least five (5) days before the meeting of the Tribal Council for 
which he is to appear. Such member will receive an opportunity to answer any and all 
charges at such designated tribal Council meeting. The decision of the Tribal Council 
shall be final.

Section 2. Recall

Upon receipt of a petition signed by 51% of the eligible voters calling for the 

recall of any member of the Tribal Council, it shall be the duty of the election board to 
call and conduct, within forty five (45) days, an election on such recall. Recall shall be 
effective only if a majority (51%) of the Tribe’s eligible voters vote in favor of such 
recall. Once a Tribal Council member has faced a recall attempt, no further recall action 
may be brought against such member until at least one (1) year has passed. No member 
of the Council shall be subject to a recall action within the first six (6) months of such 
member’s term. No more than two (2) Tribal Council members can be recalled during a 
single recall effort.

Section 3. Forfeiture

Notwithstanding Section 1 of this Article, the Tribal Council shall immediately 

remove from office, any Council member it determines:

(a) 

Has resigned in writing,

(b) 

Has been convicted of a felony,

(c) 

Has falsified such member’s qualifications or has omitted information 
concerning a conviction of a felony while being certified as a candidate for 
tribal office and such Tribal Council member shall be granted all civil 
rights provided in this Constitution,

(d) 

Has been absent without being excused by the respective body, for three 
(3) consecutive Tribal Council meetings,

(e)  Has ceased to reside physically in the State of California, or

(f) 

Has died, or otherwise has become mentally incapacitated, as determined 
by a physician.

Upon such removal, the Tribal Council shall declare this position vacant. Removal from 
office shall not serve to disqualify a person from becoming a candidate for office in 
subsequent elections, provided that the person meets all qualifications of this Constitution 
at the time of subsequent election.

ARTICLE VIII:  VACANCIES

Any Tribal Council office which has been vacated, whether it be by removal, 

recall or forfeiture, shall be filled by a vote of the General Membership at a special 
election called by the Tribal Council or election board for this purpose within thirty (30) 
days of the vacancy, if more than one (1) year remains in the term of office at the time the 
position is vacated. If less than one (1) year remains in the term, then the position shall 
be filled by a majority vote of the Tribal Council at a regularly scheduled Tribal Council 
meeting. Before such appointment is made, the Tribal Council shall provide notice to the 
General Membership of the Tribe that such appointment is on the agenda for the Tribal 
Council meeting. No person who can not qualify to serve on the Tribal Council pursuant 
to the requirements of this Constitution, shall be appointed to any vacant position.

ARTICLE IX: TRIBAL COUNCIL ENACTMENTS

Section 1.  Ordinances

All final decisions on matters of general and permanent interest to members of the 
Tribe shall be embodied in ordinances. Such enactments shall be available for inspection 
by members of the Tribe during normal office hours. Copies of newly enacted ordinances 
shall be mailed to each Tribal member upon request. All Tribal ordinances shall have a 
consistent numbering system and contain the date of enactment and the date of any 
subsequent amendments.

Section 2.  Resolutions and Motions

All final decisions on matters of short term or one time interest, where a formal 
expression from the Tribal Council is needed, shall be embodied in Resolutions. Other 
decisions of a temporary nature or relating to particular individuals, officials or 
committees shall be put in the form of motions and noted in the minutes of the Tribal 
Council. Resolutions and Tribal Council minutes shall be available for inspection by 
members of the Tribe during normal office hours.

Section 3.  Certification

All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and numbered, and shall include a 
certification showing the presence of a quorum and the number of members voting for 
and against the proposed enactment.

Section 4.  Enactments

No enactment of the Tribal Council, including resolutions, ordinances and 
motions, shall have any validity, force or effect in the absence of a quorum of the Tribal 
Council.

ARTICLE X:  POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

Section 1. Referendum

Upon presentation to the Tribal Council of a petition signed by at least fifty-one 

percent (51%) of the eligible voters, the Tribal Council shall submit any enacted or 
proposed Tribal legislation to a referendum of the General Membership. The decision of 
a majority (51%) of the eligible voters shall be final and shall have the force and effect of 
any duly enacted legislation. The Tribal Council shall call the referendum within sixty 
(60) days from the date of receipt of a valid petition. The referendum may be conducted 
at a regular or special election and shall be by secret ballot. The Tribe’s Election 
Ordinance shall provide procedures for conducting referenda.

ARTICLE XI:  BILL OF RIGHTS

Section 1.  Limits of Power of the Tribe

The Tribe, in exercising its powers of self-government, shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of worship or

religion, or abridging the freedom of speech or the press, or the right of 
any person peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress of 
grievances,

(b)  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers

and effects, conduct an unreasonable search and seizure, or issue warrants, 
except upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation particularly 
describing the place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized,

(c) 

Subject a person to the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy,

(d) 

Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself,

(e) 

Take any private property for a public use without just compensation,

(f) 

(g) 

Deny any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public 
trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be 
confronted with the witnesses against such member, and have a 
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in such member’s favor, and, 
at the defendant’s own expense, to have the assistance of counsel for such 
member’s own defense,

Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual 
punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense, 
any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of one (1) 
year or a fine of $5,000 or both,

(h)  Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws
or deprive any person of liberty or property without due process of law,

(i) 

(j) 

Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law, or

Deny any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment, the
right, upon request, to a trial by jury of such member’s peers of not less 
than six (6) persons.

Section 2.  Access to Information

Tribal members shall have the right to review all Tribal records, excluding 
personnel records, enrollment records, attorney-client communications with the Tribe’s 
attorney, and other files which, if disclosed, would jeopardize the Tribe’s present 
business or legal negotiations, at regular business hours in accordance with procedures 
established by the Tribal Council. The right of review shall not include a right to make 
copies, however, procedures for copying may be established by the Tribal Council.

Section 3.  Limitation on Hiring

A person who has admitted in writing, or has been found by a court of competent 

jurisdiction, to have committed theft or embezzlement shall not be eligible to be 
employed by the Tribe in any capacity.

ARTICLE XII: MEETINGS

Section 1. Tribal Council Regular and Special Meetings

Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held quarterly in a place 

designated by the Tribal Council. Notice of regular Tribal Council meetings, setting 
forth the time, place and agenda, shall be provided to the General Membership not less 
than two weeks prior to the meeting. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be 
called by the Chairperson or at the request of any Tribal Council member. Minutes of 
any special meetings held without notice to the General Membership shall be available 
for inspection by tribal members pursuant to Article XI, Section 2. If Tribal Council 
members are unable to physically meet due to unusual and extreme circumstances, phone 
or other electronic conferencing may be utilized for any meeting. Tribal Council 
members present by such means shall count toward a quorum.

Section 2. Tribal Council Quorum

A quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of three (3) Tribal Council members, 

however, there shall be no quorum unless the Chairperson or Vice-chairperson, are 
present. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is present.

Section 3. Open Meetings

Tribal Council meetings shall be open to all members of the Tribe. However, the 

Tribal Council may meet in closed session to discuss personnel matters, attorney-client 
communications with the Tribe’s attorney, and other subjects, which, if disclosed, would 
jeopardize the Tribe’s present business or legal negotiations.

Section 4.  General Membership Meetings

A regular meeting of the General Membership shall be held annually. The date, 

time and place of such meetings shall be determined by the Tribal Council, and 
reasonable notice setting forth the date, time, place and agenda shall be provided to all 
Tribal members by the Tribal Council. All General Membership meetings shall be open 
to all Tribal members. Special meetings of the General Membership may be called by the 
Chairperson and shall be called by him/her upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 
fifty-one percent (51%) of the eligible voters. Regular meetings of the General 
Membership shall include a report by the Chairperson regarding the business activities of 
the Tribe and a report by the Treasurer regarding the Tribe’s finances, and may include 
such other business and reports as the Tribal Council determines necessary and 
appropriate.

Section 5.  General Membership Quorum

A quorum of the General Membership shall consist of fifty one percent (51%) of 

the eligible voters. No business shall be conducted unless a quorum is present, but the 
Chairperson and Treasurer may present reports and discuss matters as required in Section 
4 of this Article in the absence of a quorum.

Section 6. Disqualification for Interest

No member of the Tribal Council shall cast a vote on any matter in which such 

member has a material, personal, or pecuniary interest.

ARTICLE XIII: DUTIES OF TRIBAL COUNCIL MEMBERS

Section 1. Assumption of Duties

Newly elected members shall assume their respective office and duties 

immediately following the certification of the election.

Section 2. Tribal Chairperson

The Chairperson shall preside over all meetings of the Tribal Council and of the 

Tribe’s General Membership and shall perform all duties of the Chairperson and exercise 
any authority delegated to such Chairperson by the Tribal Council. The Chairperson 
shall execute, on behalf of the Tribe, all contracts, leases or other documents approved by 
the Tribal Council.

The Chairperson shall cast the deciding vote in the case of a tie. The Chairperson 
shall have general supervision of employees of the Tribe, and shall see that the duties are 
properly performed. When the Tribal Council is not in session, the Chairperson shall be 
the official representative of the Tribe.

Section 3. Vice-Chairperson

The Vice-Chairperson of the Tribe shall assist the Chairperson when called upon 
to do so. In the absence of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall preside and when 
so presiding shall have all rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of the 
Chairperson.

Section 4. Secretary

The Secretary or the Tribal Council’s designee shall keep all minutes of all 

meetings of the Tribal Council and shall attest to the enactment of all resolutions and 
ordinances.

Section 5.  Treasurer

The Treasurer shall ensure the integrity of the work produced by the Tribe’s fiscal 
office. All financial records shall be available for inspection by any member of the Tribal 
Council. The Treasurer or the Tribal Council’s designee shall present periodic financial 
reports to the Tribal Council and shall present financial summary reports at meetings of 
the Tribal Council.

Section 6.  Salaries

The Tribal Council shall have the authority to set the salaries for the Tribal 

Council members and employees of the Tribe when and if funds are available.

Section 7.  Bonds

All Tribal Council members, the Tribal Administrator and fiscal staff, shall file a 

bond satisfactory to the Tribal Council.

ARTICLE XIV:  SEVERABILTY

If any provision of this Constitution shall, in the future, be declared invalid by a 
court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and 
the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect. Nothing in this Article or 
in any other provision of this Constitution shall be construed as an expressed or implied 
waiver of sovereign immunity.

ARTICLE XV:  ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION

This Constitution shall become effective when a special election, authorized and called 
for the purpose of approving this Constitution is conducted; and, wherein at least 51% of 
the eligible voters have participated in the special election; and, wherein at least 51% of 
those participating in the special election vote in the affirmative to approve this 
Constitution.

ARTICLE XVI:  AMENDMENTS

This Constitution may be amended when a special election, authorized and called 
for the purpose of amending this Constitution is conducted; and, wherein at least 51% of 
the eligible voters have participated in the special election; and, wherein at least 51% of 
those participating in the special election vote in the affirmative to amend this 
Constitution.

ARTICLE XVII:  SAVINGS CLAUSE

All prior enactments of the Tribe, not inconsistent with this Constitution, shall 

remain in full force and effect following the adoption of this Constitution.

October 30, 2006

Merlene Sanchez, Tribal Chairperson
Guideville Indian Rancheria
401 B Talmage Road
Ukiah, CA 95482

Dear Ms. Sanchez:

The following are the results from the Guideville Indian Rancheria October 27, 2006 
Constitutional election:

Total Votes Cast (Limit 1 per ballot): 

Total Ballots Counted: 
 
 

YES 

NO 

 
 Grand 
Totals 

41 

20 

61

61

Percent

67.21%

32.79%

Total Votes  

61 

100.00%

The Constitutional Election deemed 61 eligible votes that participated in the election and 1 
invalid vote. The vote was deemed invalid due to being received after the election was final. The 
invalid vote was received on Saturday October 28, 2006. Attached is a list of all eligible voters 
which state if they participated or may have been deemed invalid.

Thank you for allowing us to participate in your election this year. We look forward to working 
with you again in the future.

Sincerely,

Shannon Diaz
Staff Accountant

