 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

UPPER LAKE POMO INDIAN COMMUNITY


Ratified October 22, 1941, as Amendment III to the 
Constitution and By-laws of the Upper Lake Band 
of Pomo Indians of the Upper Lake Rancheria
 
  
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1942 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE UPPER LAKE 
POMO INDIAN COMMUNITY

PREAMBLE


We, the people of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, in order 
to establish a legal community organization to be known henceforth 
as the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community, and to secure certain 
privileges and powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization 
Act, do ordain and establish this Constitution and By-laws.

Article I.  —Territory
The jurisdiction of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community shall 
extend to all lands now within the confines of the Upper Lake Ran
cheria and the Pomo Reservation, provided that the Indians of the 
Pomo Reservation shall agree by majority vote to make their lands 
a part of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community, and shall fur
ther extend to such other lands as may hereafter be added thereto.

Article II.  —Membership
Section 1. The membership of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Com

munity shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census of the Sacramento Indian Agency for the Upper Lake Ran
cheria, as of April 1, 1935.

(b)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census of the Sacramento Indian Agency for the Pomo Reservation, 
as of November 13, 1940, provided that such Indians make written 
application for membership in the Community.

(c)  All children born to any member of the Upper Lake Pomo 
Indian Community who is a resident of the Community at the time 
of the birth of said children.

Sec. 2. The Executive Committee shall have the power to promul
gate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering future membership and the adoption of new members, when 
the resources of the Community make such adoptions feasible.

Article III.—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian 
Community shall be known as the Executive Committee and shall be 
composed of seven (7) committeemen to be elected by secret ballot.

Sec. 2. All enrolled members of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian 
Community who are 21 years of age or over and who have maintained 
legal residence in the Community for a period of one year imme
diately prior to any election are qualified voters at such election.

1This Constitution and By-laws, most of the provisions of which were adopted as an 
amendment (Amendment III, ratified October 22. 1941, and approved November 5. 1941), 
modifies the “Constitution and By-laws of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians of 
Upper Lake Rancheria.”

Sec. 3. The officers of the Executive Committee shall be the Chair
man, Vice-Chairman and Secretary-Treasurer, who shall be selected 
by the Executive Committee from its own membership at the first 
meeting after each election.

Sec. 4. The committeemen shall hold office for a term of two years, 

or until their successors are elected, except as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 5. Within thirty days after the ratification and approval of this 
amendment, a general meeting of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Com
munity shall be held to elect the officers named in Section 1, Article 
III. and to transact such other business as may be necessary.

Article IV.  —Nominations and Elections
Section 1. The seven committeemen shall be elected at a general 
meeting of the Community at which at least 30 percent of the eligible 
voters shall be present. To be eligible for nomination a candidate 
must have reached his or her twenty-first birthday and be a regularly 
qualified member of the Community.

Sec. 2. The four members of the Executive Committee receiving 
the highest vote at the November 1941 election shall hold office for 
two years; the three receiving the lowest vote shall hold office for a 
period of one year; thereafter vacancies shall be filled at annual elec
tions held on the second Thursday each November.

Sec. 3. The Executive Committee or a board appointed by the 
Executive Committee, shall determine rules and regulations govern
ing elections and shall certify to the election of members of the 
Executive Committee.

Article V.  —Vacancies and Removal From Office
Section 1. Any officer or committeeman who may resign, die or be 
removed from office shall be replaced at a regular or special meeting 
of the Executive Committee, to serve the unexpired term.

Sec. 2. Any officer or committeeman convicted of a felony or mis
demeanor involving dishonesty in any Federal, State or Indian Court 
may be removed from office by a majority vote of the Executive 
Committee.

Sec. 3. In order to expel any officer or committeeman for neglect 
of duty or gross misconduct, a majority vote of the general community 
will lie necessary; Provided, That the accused shall be given an 
opportunity to answer any and all charges at a designated general 
community meeting called for that purpose. The decision reached 
at this meeting shall be final.

Article VI.  —Powers of the Executive Committee

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The Executive Committee of the 
Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community shall exercise the following 
powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the 
Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments;
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets of the Community;

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates for Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Upper 
Lake Pomo Indian Community in accordance with the terms’ of a 
charter that may be issued to the Community by the Secretary of the 
Interior;

(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community, providing for 
the manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of tribal 
land or interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes and the 
appropriation of available tribal funds for public purposes, providing 
for the licensing of nonmembers coming into the Community for 
purposes of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, and for the 
exclusion from the territory of the Community, of persons not so 
licensed, and establishing proper agencies for the enforcement of 
such ordinances within the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community;

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the Community, any of the foregoing powers, reserving 
the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated 
power;

(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and the attached By-laws, regulating the procedure of the Committee 
itself and, also, of other tribal agencies, tribal officials, or tribal 
organizations of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community.

Sec. 2. Future Powers.—The Executive Committee may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Com
mittee by members of the Community or by the Secretary of the 
Interior or any other duly authorized official or agency of the State 
or Federal government.

Sec. 3. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community, but not expressly re
ferred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this article, but 
may be exercised by the people of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Com
munity through the adoption of appropriate by-laws and constitutional 
amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this Constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the superintendent in charge 
of the Community, who shall, within 15 days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it 
shall thereupon become effective, but the superintendent shall transmit 
a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of enactment, rescind 
the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying the Execu
tive Committee of such decision.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or reso
lution submitted to him within 15 days after its enactment, he shall 
advise the Executive Committee of his reasons therefor. If these 

reasons appear to the Committee insufficient, it may, by a majority vote, 
refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who 
may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, approve the same 
in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become 
effective.

Article VII.—Amendments

Section 1. This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Community voting at an 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, pro
vided that at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 
election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have 
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. At any regular or special Executive Committee meeting, 
amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be proposed, to 
be acted upon at the next semiannual Executive Committee meeting. 
If approved by a majority vote at such meeting, the proposed amend
ment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior who shall 
thereupon call an election upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE UPPER LAKE POMO INDIAN COMMUNITY
 
 Article I.  —Duties of Officers
Section 1. Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an 
oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he 
shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of the 
United States and this Constitution and By-laws. Oath: I, 
__________________________ , do solemnly swear that I will sup
port and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; that I will carry out, faithfully and impartially, the duties 
of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote, 
and protect the best interests of my Community in accordance with 
this Constitution and By-laws.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the Executive Committee and each 
member thereof to promote the general welfare of the members of 
this Community and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this 
Constitution and By-laws.

Sec. 3. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside over all 
meetings of the Executive Committee and carry out all orders of 
the Committee. All members of the Committee and all subordinate 
officers shall assist the chairman in all proper ways to carry out the 
orders of the Committee.

Sec. 4. The secretary-treasurer shall keep a full report of all 
proceedings of each regular and special meeting of the Executive 
Committee and shall perform such other duties of like nature as the 
Committee shall from time to time by resolution provide, and shall 
transmit copies of the minutes of each meeting to the superintendent 
in charge of the Community and to the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

The secretary-treasurer shall be the custodian of all moneys which 
may come under the jurisdiction or into the control of the Executive 
Committee. He shall pay out money in accordance with the orders 

and resolutions of the Committee. He shall keep account of all 
receipts and disbursements and shall report the same to the Commit
tee at each regular meeting. He shall be bonded in such an amount 
as the Executive Committee may by resolution, approved by the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, provide. The books of the secretary
treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection at the direction of 
the Executive Committee or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 
Until the secretary-treasurer is bonded, the Executive Committee 
may make such provision for the custody and disbursement of funds 
as shall guarantee their safety and proper disbursement and use.

Sec. 5. The subordinate officers of the Executive Committee shall 
perform such duties as the Committee may from time to time provide 
by resolution.

Sec. 6. The order of business at any regular or special meeting of 

the Executive Committee shall be as follows:

1.  Committee called to order.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the secretary-treasurer.
6.  Reading of communications.
7.  Unfinished business.
8.  New business.
9.  Adjournment.

Article II.—Meetings and Procedure

Section 1. The Executive Committee shall meet semiannually on 

the second Thursday of November and April of each year.

Sec. 2. All meetings of the Committee shall be open to members of 
the Community as auditors. Records of the Committee shall be 
open to any members of the Community.

Sec. 3. Five members of the Executive Committee shall constitute 
a quorum at any regular or special meeting. In the absence of both 
chairman and vice-chairman, the remaining Committee members may 
elect a temporary chairman to preside.

Sec. 4. Special meetings of the Executive Committee may be called 

by the chairman or by three or more members of the Committee.

Sec. 5. The members of the Community may by petition signed 
by not less than 30 percent of the voters of the Community, initiate 
any measure they deem advisable. This petition shall be filed with 
the secretary-treasurer of the Committee. It shall be the duty of the 
Committee to call a special meeting of the voters within a period of 
ten days from the date of filing such petition to vote upon the measure.
Sec. 6. The members of the Community shall have the right, 
through a petition signed by not less than 30 percent of the eligible 
voters of the Community, to call a special election to revoke any 
act of the Committee. It shall be the duty of the Committee to call 
such election within ten days from the date of the filing of such petition 
with the secretary-treasurer of the Committee.

Sec. 7. The Executive Committee shall meet with the general com
munity at the November meeting to make a report of its activities for 
the past year and to discuss future plans.

Article III.—Ratification of Constitution and By-laws

This Constitution and By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote of 
the voters of the Upper Lake Pomo Indian Community, voting at a 
special election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 
30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted 
to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in 
force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved May 29, 1941, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment III to the Con
stitution and By-laws for the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians of 
the Upper Lake Rancheria, was submitted for ratification to the 
qualified voters of the rancheria, and on October 22, 1941, was duly 
ratified by a vote of 14 for, and none against, in an election in which 
over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accord
ance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 
1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 
Stat. 378).

Harris George, 

Chairman, Community Council.

Rodney Snow, 

Secretary, Community Council.

Edwin H. Hooper,

Chief Clerk in Charge, Sacramento Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Amendment III to the Constitution and By-laws for the 
Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians of the Upper Lake Rancheria.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
or By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Upper Lake Pomo 
Indian Community.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended: October 30, 1941.
Walter V. Woehlke,

Assistant to the Commissioner.

Washington, D. C., November 5,1941.

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary.

[seal]

