 
 UNITED STATES 
 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE

UPPER LAKE BAND OF POMO INDIANS

OF THE UPPER LAKE RANCHERIA

CALIFORNIA


 
  
  
 APPROVED JANUARY 15, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS FOR THE UPPER LAKE BAND OF POMO 
INDIANS OF THE UPPER LAKE RANCHERIA OF CALIFORNIA


We, the people of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians of the Upper Lake 
Rancheria, in order to establish a legal rancheria organization and secure certain 
privileges and powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization Act, do ordain and 
establish this constitution and by-laws.
 
 

ARTICLE I-TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians shall extend to the 

territory within the confines of the Upper Lake Rancheria, and to such other lands as 
may hereafter be added thereto under any law of the United States, except as 
otherwise provided by law.
 
 

ARTICLE II-MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. The membership of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians shall 

consist of:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census rolls of the 
band of April 1, 1935.

(b) All children born to any member of the band who is a resident of the rancheria at 
the time of the birth of said children.

SEC. 2. The community council shall have the power to promulgate ordinances, 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, covering future membership and the 
adoption of new members, when the resources of the band make such adoptions 
feasible.
 
 

ARTICLE III-GOVERNING BODY

 
 SECTION 1. The governing body of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians shall 
be the community council which shall be composed of all qualified voters of the band. 
Thirty per cent of the eligible voters shall constitute a quorum (AMENDMENT I).

SEC. 2. All enrolled members of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians who are 21 

years of age or over and who have maintained legal residence on the rancheria for a 

period of 1 year immediately prior to any election are qualified voters at such election. 
Such residence, however, shall not be required as a qualification for voting upon 
amendments to the constitution and attached bylaws.

SEC. 3. The community council shall elect from its own members, by secret ballot, 

(a) chairman; (b) vice-chairman; (c) secretary; (d) treasurer; (e) and such other 
officers and committees as may be deemed necessary.

SEC. 4. The General Community Council shall meet on the second Thursday of 

November and April. (AMENDMENT I)

SEC. 5. Within 30 days after the ratification and approval of this constitution and 

bylaws, a community council shall be held for the purpose of electing the officers 
named herein, and it may transact such other business as may be necessary.
Thereafter, officials shall be chosen at the November meeting. (AMENDMENT I)

SEC. 6. The chairman, or 25 percent of the qualified voters, may, by written notice, 

call special meetings of the community council.

SEC. 7. The business committee shall consist of the chairman, secretary, and 

treasurer of the community council, and shall perform such duties as may be 
authorized by that council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV-POWERS OF THE COMMUNITY COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. Enumerated powers.-The community council of the Upper Lake Band 

of Pomo Indians shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations 
imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United States:

(a) To negotiate with the Federal, State and local Governments;

(b) To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c) To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, interests in 
lands, or other tribal assets of the band;

(d) To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation estimates 
for Federal projects for the benefit of the Upper Lake Rancheria prior to the 
submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e) To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo 
Indians in accordance with the terms of a charter that may be issued to the band by the 
Secretary of the Interior;

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of members of the Upper Lake Band 
of Pomo Indians, providing for the manner of making, holding, and revoking 
assignments of tribal land or interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes and 
the appropriation of available tribal funds for public purposes, providing for the 
licensing of nonmembers coming upon the rancheria for purposes of hunting, fishing, 
trading, or other business, and for the exclusion from the territory of the band, of 
persons not so licensed, and establishing proper agencies for the enforcement of such 
ordinances upon the Upper Lake Rancheria;

(g) To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes and to delegate to 
such organizations, or to any subordinate boards or officials of the band, any of the 
foregoing powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of such 
delegated power;

(h) To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this constitution and the attached 
bylaws, regulating the procedure of the council itself and, also, of other tribal 
agencies, tribal officials, or tribal organizations of the Upper Lake Rancheria.

SEC. 2. Future Powers.-The community council may exercise such further powers 

as may in the future be delegated to the council by members of the band or by the 
Secretary of the Interior or any other duly authorized official or agency of the State or 
Federal Government.

SEC. 3. Reserved powers.-Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Upper 
Lake Band of Pomo Indians, but not expressly referred to in this constitution shall not 
be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the people of the Upper Lake 
Band of Pomo Indians through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and constitutional 
amendments.

SEC. 4. Manner of review.-Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this 
constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to 
the superintendent in charge of the rancheria, who shall, within 10 days thereafter, 
approve or disapproves the same.

If the superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon 
become effective, but the superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his 
endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date 

of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying the 
community council of such decision.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or resolution submitted 
to him, within 10 days after its enactment, he shall advise the community council of 
his reasons therefor. If these reasons appear to the council insufficient, it may, by a 
majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who 
may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, approve the same in writing, 
whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.
 
 

ARTICLE V-AMENDMENTS

 
 SECTION 1. This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of 

the qualified voters of the band voting at an election called for that purpose by the 
Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall 
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

SEC. 2. At any regular or special community council meeting, amendments to this 

constitution and bylaws may be proposed, to be acted upon at the next semiannual 
community council meeting. If approved by a majority vote at such meeting, the 
proposed amendment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior who shall 
thereupon call an election upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

ARTICLE VI-VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE 
(AMENDMENT II)

 
 SECTION 1. Any officer who may resign, die or be removed from office shall be 

replaced only at a regular or special election of the Community Council.

SECTION 2. Any officer convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving dishonesty 
in any Federal, State or Indian Court may be removed from office by a majority vote of 
the eligible voters of the Community Council.

SECTION 3. The Community Council may, by a majority vote of the eligible voters, 
expel any officer of the Council for neglect of duty or gross misconduct: Provided, That 
the accused shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all charges at a designated 
Council meeting. The decision of the Council shall be final.
 
 

BYLAWS FOR THE UPPER LAKE BAND OF POMO INDIANS 
OF THE UPPER LAKE RANCHERIA OF CALIFORNIA

 
 ARTICLE 1. Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of 
office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall pledge himself to 
support and defend the Constitution of the United States and this constitution and 
bylaws.

Oath : I, ----------------, do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the

Constitution of the United States against all enemies; that I will carry out, faithfully 
and impartially, the duties of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, 
promote, and protect the best interests of my band in accordance with this constitution 
and bylaws.

ART. 2. It shall be the duty of the community council and each member thereof to 

promote the general welfare of the members of this band and to carry out the 
provisions and purposes of this constitution and bylaws.

ART. 3. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside over all meetings of the 

community council and carry out all orders of the council. All members of the council 
and all subordinate officers shall assist the chairman in all proper ways to carry out 
the orders of the council.

ART. 4. The community council secretary shall keep a full report of all proceedings 

of each regular and special meeting of the community council and of the business 
committee, and shall perform such other duties of like nature as the community 
council shall from time to time by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of the 
minutes of each meeting to the superintendent in charge of the rancheria and to the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

ART. 5. The community council treasurer shall be the custodian of all moneys 
which may come under the jurisdiction or into the control of the community council. 
He shall pay out money in accordance with the orders and resolutions of the 
community council. He shall keep account of all receipts and disbursements and shall 
report the same to the community council at each regular meeting. He shall be bonded 
in such an amount as the community council may by resolution, approved by the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, provide. The books of the council treasurer shall be 
subject to audit or inspection at the direction of the community council or the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Until the treasurer is bonded, the business committee 
may make such provision for the custody and disbursement of funds as shall 
guarantee their safety and proper disbursement and use.

ART. 6. The subordinate officers of the community council shall perform such 

duties as the community council may from time to time provide by resolution.

ART. 7. The order of business at any regular or special meeting of the community 

council shall be as follows:

1. Council called to order.

2. Roll call.

3. Reading of minutes of previous meeting.

4. Reports of committees.

5. Report of the council treasurer.

6. Reading of communications

7. Unfinished business.

8. New business.

9. Adjournment.

ART. 8. Ratification of constitution and bylaws .-This constitution and bylaws, 
when adopted by a majority vote of the voters of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo 
Indians, voting at a special election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at 
least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary 
of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to in order, approved April 13, 1940, by the Assistant Secretary of the 
Interior, the attached Amendments to the Constitution and By-laws for the Upper 
Lake Band of Pomo Indians of the Upper Lake Rancheria were submitted for 
ratification to the qualified voters of the band, and on May 16, 1940, Amendment I 
was adopted by a vote of 11 for, and none against, and Amendment II was adopted by 
a vote of 11 for, and none against, in an election in which more than 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 
15, 1935 (49 Stat 378).
 
  
  
 

IVAN BROWN,

 
 Chairman, Community Council. 
 

GEORGE TONEY,

ROY NASH,

 
 Superintendent, Sacramento Agency,

Secretary, Community Council.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 

America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 
984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Amendments to the Constitution 
and By-laws of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians of the Upper Lake Rancheria.

Approval recommended: July 10, 1940

F. H. DAIKER,

Assistant to the Commissioner,

OSCAR L. CHAPMAN,

[SEAL]

WASHINGTON, D. C., July 12, 1940

Assistant Secretary.

