DATE DOWNLOADED: Fri May 20 18:12:48 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake 
Rancheria (1982).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake B& of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake 
Rancheria (1982).

APA 7th ed.
(1982). Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake 
Rancheria. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake 
Rancheria. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake B& of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake Rancheria 
(S.I.: s.n., 1982)

AGLC 4th ed.
Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake
Rancheria (s.n., 1982

MLA 9th ed.
Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake 
Rancheria. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Draft of the Constitution of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake 
Rancheria. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at 
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

Un- '0 Males Ucpnrhncni ol ' e Inferior "...... 

intlll 

' 
 
 

OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR 

SACRAMENTO REGION 
 
 2RO0 COTTAGE WAY : • 

' 

SACRAMENTO. CALIJ ORNJA i)S25 

January 30, 1980 

* ‘ 1
r”- Uf'-
RCOM E-2753 

T”s r""

* €:*♦**•
c,—

.... .

Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs.,.... .
r r:"**”

Regional Solicitor

Upper Lake Rancheria Housing Authority
Ordinance ‘ 

. 

. 

* 

■ * 

: 

: ...

Ml,/

——t———:

- Memorandum 

•To: 
* * ■ 

From: 

’Subject: 

‘ 

■ 

* 

. 
 
 

- 

 
 ■ Your memorandum ’ of January 22, 1980, requests tills_ __

■' 
office's opinion on whether any legal objection exists to 

_ Bureau approval of Upper Lake Rancheria Tribal Ordinance 
/HA-79-2, joining the Rancheria in the Northern Circle ; 
.Indian Housing Authority. .Our opinion is that Tribal
Ordinance HA-79-? is of doub tful 1 eg a 1 validity for' 

: the reasons set forth below.

........

1
1
. .....
1 
 
  
  
 

I
 
 ' 
 

M
 
 m

1 
m

r

i

1
1
1
1

’ The ’ Const! tution and Bylaws of the Upper Lake 
-Rancheria were enacted under provisions of the Indian :

Reorganization Act and ratified October 22, 19^1- A 
corporate charter for the Rancheria became effective on 

’ February 15, 19^2. The Constitution, Bylav:s and corporate 
• charter of the tribe were revoked by order of the Assistant 
• Secretary of the Interior on July 20, 1961 pursuant to the 

provisions of section 11 of the Rancheria Act (72 Stat.
.619). 

• 

‘ 

:

• Prior to revocation of the Constitution, Bylaws and 
corporate charter of the Rancheria, distributees of 
Rancheria property formed the Upper Lake Porno Association 
to hold and manage such property under Articles of Associa
tion enacted May 9, 1961- 

;

The Upper Lake Porno Association is still in existence 

and is the plajntiff in the Rancheria’s suit to "unteimir^te" 
the Ranchefh. The current status of this legal action, 
Uoper Lake Fcmo Association, et al., v. Cecil Andrus,_et_ 

entered an order of partial summary judgment in favor of 
the plaintiffs. This order provides in substance that the

that the court on May 15, 1979, 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 . Rancheria was unlawfully terminated, that distributees are 

entitled to federal benefits for Indians, that deeds to 
distributees are voidable, and that the distribution plan 
for "the Rancheria is void. 

;

While the thrust, of the Court's order of May 15,1979 
.is,to restore the Rancheria to its ore-termination .status, 
the order does not, touch on the Assistant .Secretary's duly 
20, 1961 revocation of the F.a ncner i a 1 s Constitution , 
Bylaws or corporate charter. The Court’s order does void 
’ the distribution plan for the Hancheria~ and that plan bid 
in one of its provisions call for the revocation of the 
Constitution, Bylaws and corporate charter. However, the 
'Assistant Secretary's action in revoking the Rancheria's 
organic documents was not simply a response to the tribe's 
request in the distribution plan Just referred to, but an 
‘action expressly required bv section 11 of the Rancheria 
Act which is still federal law. Consequently, our opinion 
is that the Court's order of May 15, 1979 does not vacate 
the Assistant Secretary's July 20, 1961 revocation of 
the Rancheria's organic documents. 

;

It is our opinion that'unless the July ?0, 1961 ord e r 
revo!<i~Dg~Lhe Egncherja's organic doc ume nt s~~ha s already ~ 
been administratively cancelled, an order rcscindine the 
July ?0, 1961 revocation will be necessary to reestablish 
the government of Lhe Rancheria. After the Rancheria 1s 
Constitution is restored and any necessary elections are 

.held, a vote of the tribal governing body, re-adopting 

Ordinance HA-79-2 pursuant to powers granted by the : 
Rancheria’s Constitution, will be necessary to validate: 
this Ordinance. 

:

It should be noted that authority to enact the ; 

subject ordinance cannot be found in the Articles of 
Association of the Upper Lake Porno Association, that = 
Association being organized for the purpose of holding and 
managing assets conveyed to the Association by the Rancheria 
on its termination and not as a governmental organization.

Charles R. Renda
Regional Solicitor 
Sacramento Region

A. Richard Tolles
For the Regional Solicitor

2.

United States Department of the Interior 

BUREAU .OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

WASHINGTON, D.C, 20245

x MifLY wna to: 

" 
. : . * 
Tribal Government Services 

■

• '

.JAN 1983

^.depa^*^

Mr. George Foreman 
California Indian Legal Services ’ 
1736 Franklin Street, Suite 900 
Oakland, California 94612

Dear Mr. Foreman:

JUL 3 "

_ . 

...........

' 

' ' 

' 

_

We apologize for the delay in responding to your letter of December 17, 1979. As 
previously indicated to you, the original was apparently lost in transit and we had no 
knowledge of it until a copy was handed to a member of my staff in Carson City in 
February. 

_ 

;

We. do not agree that Judge Williams' decision of May 15, 1979, reinstates the Upper 
Lake Constitution which was revoked by Assistant Secretary Carver on July 20, 1961. . 
The* order does not touch on the Assistant Secretary's revocation but relates only to 
^restoring the rancheria to Federal status. An order rescinding that revocation would be 
' necessary to reinstate the Upper Lake Constitution. However, the Secretary has 

cided not to issue such an order reinstating that document. '

The revoked constitution is outmoded and deficient in many ways. Rather than attempt 
to amend it piecemeal, we believe it best for all concerned to develop a modern viable 
document at the outset. An interim governing body can be selected at a general council 
meeting to commence the general governmental duties of the rancheria. This body can 
develop a proposed constitution or a separate constitutional committee can be selected. 
There is no reason why this process cannot be accomplished quickly. (We understand an 
interim governing body has already -been established and work on a proposed draft 
constitution is proceeding). We will be glad to assist you and the interim governing : 
body in bringing this matter to a speedy conclusion. Copies of a variety of recent ; 
constitutions offering various types of governments were previously furnished to the 
Upper Lake Chairwoman at her request. Our Central California Agency and Sacra- : 
mento Area staff are working closely with rancheria officials in implementing the 
restoration process. 

.

Again we apologize for the lateness of this reply. We look forward to working with you 
and the people of Upper Lake Rancheria. 

; 

Sincerely,’ 

■

■

/s/ Theodore C. Krenske

..  

... Commissioner

Acting Deputy

--ZSacrarpento Area.Dirctor_ 

'
Central California Agency Superintendent

• Maxine Wright, Chairwoman, Upper Lake Rancheria

Tribal Operations 
076.2 Upper Lake

Ms. Maxine Wright, Chairperson 
Upper Lake Rancheria 
5738 Marconi Ave.
Carmichael, CA 95608

Dear Ms. Wright:

We have reviewed the draft copy of Upper Lake's Constitution which you 

submitted. We have retyped a draft incorporating changes suggested by 

this office. These changes were discussed with Stan Malicay on October 4. 

Some of the Articles have been rearranged for continuity, but the basic 

information has not been changed.

If you disagree with any of the changes or have any questions, please 

feel free to contact the Tribal Operations office at (916) 484-4659.

Sincerely yours, 

/s/ JIM WOLF, JR.

ACTING Superintendent

Enclosure 

FMuncy: 10/13/82
 
  
  
  
 

 
 
 
 DRAFT 10-12-82 
 

CONSTITUTION 

 
 of the 
 

UPPER LAKE BAND OF POMO INDIANS

UPPER LAKE RANCHERIA

PREAMBLE 


We, the members of the Upper Lake Band of Porno Indians located in Lake County, 

State of California, in order to establish a more effective form of Tribal

Government, to better exercise the privileges and powers of self-government, to 

preserve Pano Tribal easterns, to use and control our hereditary lands, and to 

secure our rights and privileges as members do hereby establish this

Constitution for the members of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians.

The name of this organization shall be the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake Rancherla, 

shall extend to all lands within the confines of the boundaries as established 

by Secretarial Order of February 15, 1907; Act of April 30, 1908; and Act of 

June 18, 193^ for the UppeY'Lakd Rancherla and to such other lands as may 

hereafter be acquired by or for the Upper Lake Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Membership in the Upper Lake Band of Pano Indians, Upper Lake

Rancherla, shall consist of the following categories: 

(a)  All persons whose names appear on the Revocation of Termination
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 Proclamation and Restoration of Federal Stat Notice for Upper Lake 

Rancheria.

(b)  All persons living on the effective date of this constitution who 

were listed as distributees and dependent members of their inmediate 

families in the Plan for the Distribution of the Assets of the Upper 

Lake Rancheria as approved by the Under Secretary of the Interior on 

September 16, 1959.

(c)  Spouses of individuals listed in (a) above who have at least 

one-fourth (1/4) degree of California Indian blood.

(d)  Persons who are lineal descendants of individuals eligible for 

membership under (a) above, regardless of whether the ancestor 

through whom eligibility is claimed is living or deceased, provided

such descendants possess at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Porno Indian

blood.

Section 2. A person who has been allotted on another reservation or is 

officially enrolled with or is a recognized member of some other tribe or band 

shall not be enrolled. A "recognized member of another tribe or rancheria" is 

a person whose name is listed on the membership roll of another tribe or 

rancheria or has received a land assignment on another reservation.

Section 3. The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with 

an ordinace adopted by the governing body and approved by the Secretary of the 

Interior or his authorized representative. Such ordinance shall contain 

provisions for enrollment procedures, enrollment committees, application forms, 

approval or disapproval of applications, rejection notices, appeals, 

corrections and provisions for keeping the roll on a current basis.

Section 1. The governing body of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians shall be 
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 
 the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall consist of nine (9) members 

elected at large, and hereinafter as specified in Article V. Three (3) Tribal 

Council members shall be elected to represent each of the following: Hardisty; 

Dewell; and three other members at large.

Section 2. The officers of the Tribal Council shall be composed of a 

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary, Treasurer, and five (5) members. 

Except for the first election as provided for in Article V, Section 3, all 

members of the Tribal Council shall be elected for terms of two (2) years.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Any Enrolled Voting Member of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians 

who will be at least eighteen (18) years of age on election day shall be 

eligible to vote.

Section 2. Any enrolled member of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians shall be 

eligible to be a candidate for election to the Tribal Council if (s)he has 

reached the age of eighteen (18) years.

Section 3. The first election of the Tribal Council members shall be held 

thirty (30) days after ratification of this Constitution. At the first 

election the Chairperson and Treasurer shall be elected for terms of two-years 

and the Vice-Chairperson and Secretary will be elected for terms of one-year.

All other Tribal Council members shall have staggered terms as follows: Three 

(3) Tribal Council members who receive the highest votes shall hold office for 

two (2) years. Two Tribal Council members who receive the next highest votes 

shall hold office for one (1) year. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be 

for two (2) years on a staggered basis.

Section 4. Elected members of the Tribal Council will be inaugurated and shall
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 take office at a meeting on the same day that elections are held. The Tribal 

Council shall see that all Tribal Council members have a correct and clear 

understanding of the Constitution and the management of tribal and rancheria 

affairs.

Section 5. General elections to vote for Councilmen shall be held every year 

on the first Saturday in January. The voting place shall be designated in an 

election ordinance.

Section 6. All elections shall be announced by special notice posted at least 

thirty (30) days before the election.

Section 7. Nominations of Tribal Council Members shall be made at a general 

meeting of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians called for that purpose.

Procedures for the nomination process shall be as follows:

(a) candidates shall file for specific position by submitting to the

tribal council a nomination petition signed by not less than five (5) 

eligible voting members. A voter may sign only one (1) petition for 

a specific position.

Section 8. If the Tribal Council shall fail to give the appropriate notice of 

the election, or in case a regular election has not been held, the Secretary of 

the Interior, upon the receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent 

(30%) of the registered voters of the tribe shall call such election and shall 

give thirty (30) days notice, setting the time and place of the election. The 

calling of an election shall take place no later than sixty (60) days from the

date of the petition, according to the rules and regulations prescribed by the

Secretary of the Interior, but such rules and regulations shall not differ 

substantially from tribal rules and procedures.

Section 9. In any election wherein a procedural problem or conflict develops 

between tribal custom and constitution, this constitution shall prevail.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. REMOVAL: Any member of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper 

Lake Rancheria Tribal Council or other official of the Upper Lake Rancheria 

who, during the term for which he/she is elected or appointed, is convicted of 

a felony in any Federal or State Court shall automatically forfeit his/her 

office effective on the date of his/her initial conviction in court. Any 

official found guilty by the Tribal Council of behavior involving misconduct 

reflecting on the dignity and integrity of the tribal government, malfeasance 

in office, or gross neglect of duty shall be removed from office if at least 

four (4) members of the Tribal Council vote in favor of such removal. Voting 

must be by secret ballot and the Chairperson is entitled to vote. If the 

accused is a member of the Tribal Council, the accused shall have the right to 

cast a secret ballot. Before any vote for removal is taken, such member of 

official shall be given a written statement of the charges against him/her at 

least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Tribal Council at which he/she is 

to appear and he/she shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all 

charges at the designated council meeting. The decision of the Tribal Council 

shall be final.

Section 2. RECALL: Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least fifty-one 

percent (51%) of the qualified voters of the rancheria, it shall be the duty of 

the Tribal Council to call and conduct within thirty (30) days an election to 

consider the recall of an elected official.

The election shall be conducted pursuant to the election ordinance. Once an

individual has been subjected to recall proceedings, he/she shall not again be 
 
 

 
 
 subjected to such action during the balance of his/her term of office.

Section 3. FORFEITURE: After due notice, it shall be the duty of the affected 

governmental body immediately to declare vacant any position and to promptly 

fill such vacancy in the manner provided in Article IX when it is determined 

that the incumbent:

(a)  has resigned,

(b)  has been convicted of a crime involving dishonesty while in office,

(c)  has been convicted of a felony while in office,

(d)  has falsified his/her affidavit of qualifications or has emitted 

information concerning a conviction of a felony or any crime 

involving dishonesty when being certified as a candidate for tribal 

office,

(e)  has been absent for three (3) consecutive meetings, without being 

excused by the respective body, provided, that the loss of office for 

such reason shall not serve to deny a person from becoming a 

candidate for office in subsequent elections, or

(f)  has ceased to reside physically in the State of California.

Section 1. Any office which has been vacated, whether it be by removal, 

recall, or forfeiture, shall be filled by appointment of the Tribal Council at 

its next meeting and such replacement shall serve the unexpired term of office.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VACANCIES 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians Tribal Council shall have the 

following powers:

(a)  To represent the tribe and act in all matters that concern the 

general welfare of the tribe, and to make decisions consistent with

this Constitution and the Constitution and Laws of the United States. 

(b)  To negotiate and make contracts with Federal, State, and local 

governments and with any individual, firm, or company subject to the 

approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 

representatives where such approval is required by this Constitution.

(c)  To advise and consult with the Secretary of the Interior or his 

authorized representative on all activities that may affect the Upper 

Lake Band of Pomo Indians, Upper Lake Rancheria, and to make 

appropriation requests to the Bureau of Indian Affairs on any 

projects beneficial to the Upper Lake Band of Porno Indians.

(d)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to 

be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or 

his/her representatives so long as such approval is required by 

Federal Law.

(e)  To veto the sales, disposition, lease, or encumberance of tribal 

lands or interest In tribal lands, tribal funds or other tribal 

assets which may be authorized by any agency or employee of the 

government.

(f)  To protect and preserve the wildlife and natural resources of the 

tribe, to regulate hunting, fishing or trapping on the reservation.

(g)  To cultivate Indian arts, crafts, and cultures.

(h)  To negotiate pennits and leases, subject to approval of the Secretary 

of the Interior, for business, hemesite, and other purposes and 

generally to provide for proper use and development of all tribal 

lands, natural resources and other tribal property.

(i)  To appropriate tribal funds for tribal purposes.

(j)  To mortgage or otherwise encumber tribal trust land and to borrow

money from any source and pledge or assign chattels or future tribal 

income as security therefore with the approval of the Secretary of 

the Interior or his authorized representative.

(k)  To enact ordinances to regulate the use of all reservation lands 

through zoning, taxation and otherwise.

(1)  To manage and control community property, community enterprises and 

economic projects and programs of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians 

including, but not limited to, the establishment of housing rental 

authorities, loan programs, and appointment of planning, programming, 

and development committees, and the development of impact and 

environmental statement.

(m)  To authorize, charter, and regulate associations and corporations 

formed by members of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indian tribe for 

business or charitable purposes and to authorize formation of 

corporations under Federal or State law for economic, charitable or 

public purposes.

(n)  To provide by resolution or ordinance the conditions upon which 

non-members may enter or remain on the reservation and provide for 

the removal or exclusion from the reservation of any non-members 

whose presence may be injurious to the tribal members or to the 

interests of the tribe. 

(o)  To regulate its own procedures, to appoint subordinate committee 

commissions, boards, tribal officials and employees not otherwise 

provided for in this Constitution and to prescribe their salaries, 

tenure and duties. Appointees may or may not be tribal members.

(p)  The Tribal Council may exercise such other powers as may be delegated 

to the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians by the Secretary of the 

Interior or his authorized representative.

Section 2. The foregoing enumeration of powers shall not be construed to limit 

the powers of the Upper Lake Band of Pano Indians and in no way shall be deemed 

an abdication or forfeiture of the tribe's inherent attributes of sovereignty 

and such powers may be exercised through the adoption of appropriate 

constitutional amendments. 
 
 

ARTICLE IX - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS 

 
 Section 1. ORDINANCES: All final decisions on matters of general and 

permanent interest to members of the tribe shall be embodied in ordinances, 

such as an enrollment ordinance or an election ordinance. Such enactments 

shall be available for inspection by members of the Tribal Council during 

normal office hours.

Section 2. RESOLUTIONS AND MOTIONS: All final decisions on matters of short 

term or one time interest where a formal expression is needed shall be embodied 

in resolutions. Other decisions of a temporary nature or relating to 

particular individuals, officials or committees shall be put in the form of 

motions and noted in the minutes and shll be available for inspection by 

members of the Tribal Council during normal office hours.

Section 3. All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and numbered, and 

shall include a certification showing the presence of a quorum and the number

of members voting for or against the proposed enactment.

Section No enactment of the Upper Lake Band of Pano Indians shall have any 

validity or effect in the absence of a quorum of the membership thereof at a 

legally called session.

Section 5. APPROVAL OF TRIBAL ENACTMENTS: Any resolution or ordinance which 

by the terms of this Constitution or Federal law requires the approval of the
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 Secretary of the Interior must be received by the local Bureau Superintendent 

no later than ten (10) days following its enactment in order to be considered 

for approval. It shall be the duty of the Secretary's local representative to 

issue acknowledgement of receipt of such enactment within five (5) working days 

of his receipt thereof. If timely filed, that enactment shall not become 

effective until it is approved by the Secretary's authorized representative, 

provided that if such enactment is not disapproved within ninety (90) days from 

the date it is timely received by the Secretary's local representative, it 

shall on the ninety-first (91) day automatically become effective.

Section 6. All records, official tribal documents in possession of outgoing 

Tribal Council members shall be turned over to the new Tribal Council within 

ten (10) days. Tribal ordinance will describe consequences that shall follow 

if not complied with.
 
 

ARTICLE X - REFERENDUM

 
 Upon a petition of at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters of the 

Tribe, any enacted or proposed resolution or ordinance of the Tribal Council 

shall be submitted to popular referendum and the vote shall decide whether the 

ordinance or resolution shall thereafter continue to be in effect. At least

fifty-one percent (51%) of the eligible voters shall vote in such a referendum 

and a 2/3 majority shall prevail. Prior to obtaining signatures, a copy of the 

proposed petition shall be filed with the elected Tribal Council Secretary.

The petition shall not be valid if this copy of the petition is not first filed 

with the Tribal Council Secretary. The Tribal Council shall meet and set a 

time, place, and date for referendum in accordance with existing election

procedures. Before or during the petition process, the Tribal Council shall 

furnish a list of eligible voters if requested to do so.
 
 

ARTICLE XI  - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. In accordance with Title II of the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 

(82 Stat. 77), the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians in exercising its powers of 

self-government shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the fullexercise of religion, or 

abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the 

people peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress of 

grievances;

(b)  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons,

houses, papers and effects against unreasonable search and seizure, 

nor issue warrants, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or 

affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched and 

the person or thing to be seized;

(c)  Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

(d) 

Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against 

himself;

(e)  Take any private property for a public use without just compensation;

(f)  Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy 

trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to 

be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have compulsory 

process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and, at his own 

expense, to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

(g)  Require  excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and

unusual  punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any one

offense any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a 

term of  six (6) months or a fine of $500 or both;

(h)  Deny to  any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of

its laws or deprive any person of liberty or property without due
 
 

 
 
 
 
 process of laws;

(i) Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law;

(j) Deny to any person accused of imprisonment the right, upon request, 

to a tribal by jury of not less than six (6) persons.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held as designated 

in a resolution by the Tribal Council. Such designation shall follow as 

closely as possible to the dates and times being followed prior to the adoption 

of this Constitution.

Section 2.  Special meetings  of the  Tribal Council  may be called  by  the

Chairman or  special meetings  may  be called by Chairman  upon  the written  request

of three or more members of the Tribal Council. Written notice shall be given 

to each Tribal Council member at least five (5) days prior to special meetings.

Section 3. Four (4) meetings will be held for general membership which will be 

quarterly. Written notices shall be given to each member at least ten (10) 

days prior to meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - ORDER OR BUSINESS

 
 Section 1. In the conduct of business, Robert’s Rules of Order shall apply 

except when they are inconsistent with the expressed provisions of this 

Constitution. All regular meetings shall be open to all members of the tribe.

Section 2. The order of business at any regular or special meetings of the 

Tribal Council shall be as follows:

(a)  Call to order by the Chairperson

(b)  Roll Call

(c)  Reading of Minutes of last meeting

(d)  Unfinished Business

(e)  Reports

(f)  New Business

(g)  Adjournment

Section 3. Voting at the Tribal Council meetings may be by voice, but at the 

discretion of the Chairperson, or upon the request of any two members of the 

Tribal Council, a secret vote may be taken.

Section 4. Natters of business for the Tribal Council shall be decided by

majority vote. A quorum of the Tribal Council shall be five (5) or more 

members, which may include the Chairperson or Vice-Chairperson. At least one 

(1) member from each faction, Hardisty, Dewell, and one member at large.

Section 5. No Tribal Council member shall vote on any matter coming before the 

Tribal Council in which she/he would be personally enriched by the outcome of 

the vote, unless special consent is given by a majority vote of the remaining 

Tribal Council members. 

Section 6. Each official, elected or appointed, shall taken an oath of office 

prior to assuming his/her duties which shall be: "I (NAME) do 

solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United 

States against all enemies, that I will carry out faithfully and impartially 

the duties of my office to the best of my ability, that I will cooperate, 

promote, and protect the best interests of my Tribe in accordance with this 

Constitution.”
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The Chairperson of the Tribal Council shall preside over all

meetings of the Tribal Council, shall perform all duties of a Chairperson and

countersigned by the Chairperson of the Tribal Council and by some 

other officer designated by the Tribal Council.

(e) As a member of the Tribal Council, she/he shall have the power to 

vote at any time.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - SAVINGS AND SEVERABILITY

 
 Section 1. If any provision of the Constitution shall in the future, be 

declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision of 

provisions shall be severed and the remaining provisions shall continue in full 

force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the eligible 

voters of the Tribe voting in an election called for that purpose by the 

Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative. It shall be the 

duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed 

amendment at the request of the Tribal Council or upon receipt of a petition 

signed by twenty percent (20%) of the eligible voters of the Tribe. At least 

thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote must vote in such an election; 

but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved by 

the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

Section 2. In view of the changing times, it shall be the responsibility of 

the incumbent Tribal Council to review this Constitution not less than every 

five (5) years and recanmend changes with the first year beginning upon the 

effective date of this Constitution. This, however, does not preclude other 

changes as are considered necessary at any time.

This Constitution when adopted by a majority vote of the eligible voters of the
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - ADOPTION

  
 
 exercise any authority given him/her specifically by the Tribal Council or by a 

general meeting of the Tribe. The Chairperson shall have the power to vote 

only in case of a tie.

Section 2. The Vice-Chairperson in the absence of the regular Chairperson 

shall preside and shall have all powers, privileges and duties of the 

Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall have the power to vote at any meeting, 

except when acting as Chairperson.

Section 3. The Tribal Council Secretary shall have charge of all tribal

correspondence and it shall be his/her duty to submit copies of all minutes of 

the regular and special meetings of the Tribal Council as well as copies of all 

resolutions and ordinances adopted by the Tribal Council to appropriate offices 

of the Bureau of Indian Affairs. As a member of the Tribal Council she/he 

shall have the power to vote at any meeting.

Section 4. The duties of the Treasurer shall be as follows:

(a)  She/he shall accept, receipt for, keep and safeguard all funds in the 

custody of the Tribal Council. She/he shall deposit all such funds 

as directed by the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians and shall keep 

accurate records of such funds and shall report on all receipts and

expenditures and the amounts and nature of all tribal funds in

his/her custody to the Tribal Council.

(b)  The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least once 

a year by a competent auditor employed by the Tribal Council, and at 

such other times as the Tribal Council may direct.

(c)  The Treasurer shall be required to give a surety bond satisfactory to 

the Tribal Council and the local Bureau Superintendent.

(d)  All checks shall be signed by the Treasurer and shall be
 
 

 
 
 
 Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians; voting in an election called for that purpose 

by the Secretary of the Interior, provided at least thirty percent (30%) of 

those eligible to vote in such election shall vote, and when submitted to and 

approved by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be effective from the date of 

such approval.

January 20, 1983

Dear Mr. O'Connor:

This memorandum is in response to Mr. Forman’s complaints 

that the Bureau of Indian Affairs has refused to recognize 
the constitution for the Upper Lake Band of Indians and his 
allegations that the Bureau of Indian Affairs has refused to 
reply to his inquiries concerning the constitution.

Concerning Mr. Forman’s inquiries to the Bureau of Indian 

Affairs about the reinstatement of the Upper Lake Constitution, 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs responded to Mr. Forman's 
request on July 3, 1980 wherein he took the position that the 
Constitution had been properly revoked and explained that it was 
BIA’s intent to aid the Band in formulating a new Constitution 
which would better fit their needs at this time. A copy of 
the Commissioner’s July 3, 1980 memorandum is enclosed for 
your information. This office had previously taken a similar 
position that the Constitution had been properly revoked 
on January 30, 1980 in a memorandum to the Area Director, 
Bureau of Indian Affairs. A copy of that memorandum is
enclosed.

In accordance with the Commissioner's memorandum of 

July 3, 1980, the Upper Lake Indians held an election 
on January 5, 1980 wherein an interim group of officers were 
elected. The primary purpose of this interim group of 
officers was to develop a proposed constitution for the 
Upper Lake Band of Indians. The proposed constitution was 
prepared by the Interim committee and forwarded to the 
Commissioner’s Office for their review and returned to the 
Upper Lake Band by the Central California Agency on 
October 13, 1982, with comments of proposed changes by the

Commissioner's Office. The Interim committee called a 
constitutional election on November 6, 1982 and was unable 
to hold the election due to lack of a quorum. They again 
called an election on December 11, 1982 and again there were 
insufficient members for a quorum. To date, the Upper Lake 
members have not requested the Bureau’s assistance in holding 
their election.

The basic reason that the Upper Lake Indians have had 
problems in adopting a new constitution is that there is a 
conflict between two groups of Indians from the reservation. 
The two groups consist of the individuals who were designated 
as distributees under the Rancheria Act and those members who 
would be dependents of the distributees of the Rancheria. 
The distributees apparently desire to reinstate the old 
constitution limiting membership to the distributees. The 
dependent members want a constitution which would include 
all Indians of the Rancheria.

Should you require additional information, please do 

not hesitate to call.

Sincerely yours,

Assistant Regional Solicitor 
Pacific Southwest Region

cc: Area Director, BIA

Attn: Norm Sahmaunt

Carmen Facio

Encs.

