 
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE  
 
UPPER LAKE BAND OF POMO INDIANS 
OF THE UPPER LAKE RANCHERIA 

CALIFORNIA


 
 APPROVED JANUARY 15, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE 

UPPER LAKE BAND OF POMO INDIANS 

OF THE UPPER LAKE RANCHERIA

CALIFORNIA


 
  
  
 APPROVED JANUARY 15, 1935 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1986 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS FOR THE UPPER LAKE
BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE UPPER LAKE
RANCHERIA OF CALIFORNIA


We, the people of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians of the 
Upper Lake Rancheria, in order to establish a legal rancheria organ
ization and secure certain privileges and powers offered to us by the 
Indian Reorganization Act, do ordain and establish this constitution 
and bylaws.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians shall 
extend to the territory within the confines of the Upper Lake 
Rancheria. and to such other lands as may hereafter be added thereto 
under any law of the United States, except as otherwise provided 
by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo 

Indians shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

census rolls of the band of April 1, 1935.

(b)  All children bom to any member of the band who is a resi

dent of the rancheria at the time of the birth of said children.

Sec. 2. The community council shall have the power to promul
gate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering future membership and the adoption of new. members, when 
the resources of the band make such adoptions feasible.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo 
Indians shall be the community council which shall be composed of 
all qualified voters of the band. A majority of the eligible voters 
shall constitute a quorum.

Sec. 2. All enrolled members of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo 
Indians who are 21 years of age or over and who have maintained 
legal residence on the rancheria for a period of 1 year immediately 
prior to any election are qualified voters at such election. Such 
residence, however, shall not be required as a qualification for voting 
upon amendments to the constitution and attached bylaws.

Sec. 3. The community council shall elect from its own members, 
by secret ballot, (a) chairman; (b) vice-chairman; (c) secretary; 
(d) treasurer; (e) and such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. The community council shall meet on the first Monday of 

January and July.

Sec. 5. Within 30 days after the ratification and approval of this 
constitution and bylaws, a community council shall be held for the 
purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it may transact 
such other business as may be necessary. The officers elected at this 
meeting shall serve until the July meeting at which time their suc
cessors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be chosen at the 
July meeting.

Sec. 6. The chairman, or 25 percent of the qualified voters, may, 

by written notice, call special meetings of the community council.

Sec. 7. The business committee shall consist of the chairman, secre
tary, and treasurer of the community council, and shall perform such 
duties as may be authorized by that council.

Article IV—Powers of the Community Council

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The community council of the 
Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians shall exercise the following 
powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the 
Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local Governments;
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets of the band;

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates for Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Upper Lake Rancheria prior to the submission of such estimates to 
the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Upper 
Lake Band of Pomo Indians in accordance with the terms of a char
ter that may be issued to the band by the Secretary of the Interior;
(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members of the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, providing for 
the manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of tribal 
land or interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes and the 
appropriation of available tribal funds for public purposes, providing 
for the licensing of nonmembers coming upon the rancheria for pur
poses of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, and for the 
exclusion from the territory of the band, of persons not so licensed, 
and establishing proper agencies for the enforcement of such ordi
nances upon the Upper Lake Rancheria:

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the band, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power;
(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this constitution 
and the attached bylaws, regulating the procedure of the council 
itself and, also, of other tribal agencies, tribal officials, or tribal 
organizations of the Upper Lake Rancheria.

Sec. 2. Future powers.—The community council may exercise such 
further powers as may in the future be delegated to the council 
by members of the band or by the Secretary of the Interior or 

any other duly authorized official or agency of the State or Federal 
Government.

Sec. 3. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, but not expressly 
referred to in this constitution shall not be abridged by this article, 
but may be exercised by the people of the Upper Lake Band of 
Pomo Indians through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and 
constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which 
by the terms of this constitution, is subject to review by the Sec
retary of the Interior, shall be presented to the superintendent in 
charge of the rancheria, who shall, within 10 days thereafter, 
approve or disapprove the same.

If the superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Sec
retary of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of  
enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, 
by notifying the community council of such decision.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him, within 10 days after its enactment, he 
shall advise the community council of his reasons therefor. If 
these reasons appear to the council insufficient, it may, by a majority 
vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the In
terior, who may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, 
approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or 
resolution shall become effective.

Article V—Amendments

Section 1. This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the band voting at an election 
called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided 
that at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 
election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have 
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. At any regular or special community council meeting, 
amendments to this constitution and bylaws may be proposed, to be 
acted upon at the next semiannual community council meeting. If 
approved by a majority vote at such meeting, the proposed amend
ment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior who shall 
thereupon call an election upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

BYLAWS FOR THE UPPER LAKE BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE 
UPPER LAKE RANCHERIA OF CALIFORNIA

 
 Article 1. Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take 
an oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath 
he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of 
the United States and this constitution and bylaws.

Oath: I,------------------ , do solemnly swear that I will support and
defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies; 
that I will carry out, faithfully and impartially, the duties of my 
office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote, and 

protect the best interests of my band in accordance with this con
stitution and bylaws.

Art. 2. It shall be the duty of the community council and each 
member thereof to promote the general welfare of the members of 
this band and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this 
constitution and bylaws.

Art. 3. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside over all 
meetings of the community council and carry out all orders of the 
council. All members of the council and all subordinate officers 
shall assist the chairman in all proper ways to carry out the orders 
of the council.

Art. 4. The community council secretary shall keep a full report 
of all proceedings of each regular and special meeting of the com
munity council and of the business committee, and shall perform 
such other duties of like nature as the community council shall from 
time to time by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of the 
minutes of each meeting to the superintendent in charge of the 
rancheria and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Art. 5. The community council treasurer shall be the custodian of 
all moneys which may come under the jurisdiction or into the con
trol of the community council. He shall pay out money in accord
ance with the orders and resolutions of the community council. He 
shall keep account of all receipts and disbursements and shall report 
the same to the community council at each regular meeting. He 
shall be bonded in such an amount as the community council may 
by resolution, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
provide. The books of the council treasurer shall be subject to 
audit or inspection at the direction of the community council or the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Until the treasurer is bonded, the 
business committee may make such provision for the custody and 
disbursement of funds as shall guarantee their safety and proper 
disbursement and use.

Art. 6. The subordinate officers of the community council shall 
perform such duties as the community council may from time to 
time provide by resolution.

Art. 7. The order of business at any regular or special meeting 

of the community council shall be as follows:

 Reading of minutes of previous meeting.

1.  Council called to order.
2.  Roll call.
3. 
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the council treasurer.
6.  Reading of communications.
7.  Unfinished business.
8.  New business.
9.  Adjournment.
Art. 8. Ratification of constitution and bylaws.—This constitu
tion and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the voters of 
the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians, voting at a special elec
tion called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 30 
percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to 
the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in 
force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 6, 1935, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached constitution and bylaws was sub
mitted for ratification to the Upper Lake Band of Pomo Indians 
of the Upper Lake Rancheria and was on November 30, 1935, duly 
ratified by a vote of 15 for, and 12 against, in an election in which 
over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accord
ance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 
1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (Pub. 
No. 147, 74th Cong.)

Rodney Snow,

Chairman of election board.
Leonard Bateman, 
Secretary of election board.

Roy Nash, 

Superintendent in charge of the Rancheria.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and bylaws of the Upper Lake Band of 
Pomo Indians of the Upper Lake Rancheria.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution or 
bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Upper Lake Band of 
Pomo Indians of the Upper Lake Rancheria.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and bylaws.

Approval recommended, January 7, 1936.

William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., January 15, 1936.

