HeinOnline

Citation:
George Emory Fay, Compiler %26 Editor. Charters,
Constitutions and By-Laws of the Indian Tribes of North
America (1967-1981 All Published).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Thu Jun 28 13:58:13 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device
 
  
  
 

CONSTITUTION OF THE HOH INDIAN TRIBE

OF WASHINGTON

 
 Ratified May 24, 1969 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Hoh Tribe, in order to establish a tribal organization and 

secure certain privileges and powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), do ordain and establish this constitution for the 
Hoh Indian Tribe.

ARTICLE I  — TERRITORY

The territory of the Hoh Indian Reservation shall include all lands set aside for 

Hoh Indians by Executive Order dated September 11, 1893, and any other lands which 
may be acquired for or by, and held in trust in the name of the Hoh Indian Tribe. 
The jurisdiction of the Hoh Indian Tribe over its lands shall not be Inconsistent 
with applicable Federal and State laws. However, nothing in this article shall be 
construed as restricting the treaty hunting and fishing rights of members, including 
the right to fish in usual and accustomed places.

ARTICLE II  — MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1. The membership of the Hoh Indian Tribe shall consist of:

(a) .All persons whose names appear on the October 14, 1966, approved base roll of 

the Hoh Tribe, prepared in accordance with Public Law 89-655 (80 Stat. 905).

(b) .All persons of one-fourth degree or more Indian blood born to any member of 

the Hoh Tribe.

SEC. 2. The Hoh Tribe shall have the power to pass ordinances, subject to approv

al by the Secretary of the Interior, governing relinquishment of membership and the 
adoption of members.

ARTICLE III — GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The tribe shall elect the following officers by secret ballot: (1) a 

chairman, (2) a vice chairman, (3) a secretary, and (4) a treasurer. The officers 
shall be adult members who have been living on the reservation for a period of one 
year preceding any election.

SEC. 2. The governing body of the Hoh Indian Tribe shall consist of the officers 

of the Hoh Tribe and shall be known as the Hoh Tribal Business Committee. The tribal 
business committee may also appoint or employ such other officers or committees which 
are considered necessary,

SEC. 3.  (a) The Hoh Tribe shall hold regular annual meetings, the date to be set

by the Hoh Tribal Business Committee.

(b) .The Hoh Tribal Business Committee shall hold meetings as called either in wri

ting or verbally by the chairman or three members of the Hoh Tribal Business 
Committee at any time when tribal business is to be transacted. No business 
shall be transacted unless a quorum of three members is present.

(c).Special meetings of the tribe may be called by the chairman, or by ten percent 

of the qualified voters.

(d) .Written notices of regular and special meetings of the tribe shall be sent to 
each qualified voter 10 days in advance of any regular or special meeting.

(e).Twenty-five percent of the adult members shall constitute a quorum of the 

tribe. No business shall be conducted unless a quorum is present.

(f) .Any member of the tribe twenty-one years of age or older shall be entitled to 

vote and participate in all meetings of the tribe.

SEC. 4. Within sixty days after the ratification and approval of this constitution, 

the Hoh Tribe shall meet for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and 
to transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers elected at this 
meeting shall serve for one year or until the regular meeting closest to one year. 
Thereafter, officers shall be elected every two years, pursuant to an appropriate 
election ordinance, and shall serve until their successors are duly installed.

ARTICLE IV  — POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The Hoh Tribal Business Committee shall have the following powers to 

the extent that it can legally exercise them, to administer the affairs of the Hoh 
Reservation subject to any limitations imposed by applicable State laws, statutes of 
the United States, or published regulations of the Secreta;ry of the Interior:

(a) .To consult, negotiate, contract, or conclude agreements with Federal, State, 
and local governments, and others, on behalf of the tribe and to advise and 
consult with their representatives on all activities which may affect the 
tribe,

(b) .To acquire, lease, permit, sell, assign, manage, or provide for the management 

of tribal lands, interests in lands or interests in lands acquired within or 
without the reservation,

(c) .To veto the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal lands, interests 

in lands, or other tribal assets,

(d) .To manage tribal funds in accordance with approved resolutions, including the 

power to borrow money from any source, subject to the approval of the Secre
tary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(e) .To receive advice from, and make recommendations to, the Secretary of the In
terior or his authorized representative with regard to all appropriation 
estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the tribe, before such esti
mates are submitted to the Bureau of the Budget and Congress.

(f) .To pass ordinances authorizing the levy and collection of taxes from members 
of the tribe; and to pass ordinances authorizing the levy and collection of 

taxes or license fees from nonmembers doing business on the reservation; and 
otherwise regulate the conduct of business activities on the reservation; 
provided, that any ordinance affecting nonmembers of the Hoh Reservation 
shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior,

(g).To pass and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of members, subject to 

review by the Secretary of the Interior,

(h).To pass ordinances authorizing the tribe to remove or exclude from the reser

vation persons not legally entitled to reside there, or trespassers, or un
desirable persons, such ordinances to be subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior,

(i).To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be sub

ject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized rep
resentative, so long as such approval is required by law,

(j).To enact an election ordinance setting forth procedures for conducting tribal 

elections,

ARTICLE V  — DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS

SECTION 1. The Chairman of the Hoh Tribe shall preside over all meetings of the 

Hoh Tribal Business Committee and the tribe, and shall carry out all orders of the 
Hoh Tribal Business Committee, He shall be allowed to vote only in case of a tie. 
He shall countersign all checks involving the expenditures of tribal funds and exer
cise any authority specifically delegated to him by the Hoh Tribal Business Commit
tee. He shall sign all correspondence.

SEC. 2. The Vice Chairman of the Hoh Tribe shall assist the chairman when called 
upon to do so. In the absence of the chairman he shall preside over all meetings of 
the Hoh Tribal Business Committee and the tribe, When so presiding he shall have all 
the rights, privileges, and duties, as well as the responsibilities of the chairman,

SEC, 3. The secretary shall prepare and maintain a complete record of all matters 
transacted at all meetings. It shall be the duty of the secretary to transmit copies 
of minutes of all meetings to the Superintendent or officer in charge of the reserva
tion,

SEC. 4. The treasurer shall have custody of and be responsible for all funds in 

the custody of the Hoh Tribal Business Committee. The treasurer shall deposit all 
tribal funds in a federally insured bank or elsewhere, as directed by the Hoh Tribal 
Business Committee, and shall keep proper records of such funds. The treasurer shall 
not pay out any funds except when authorized to do so by a properly executed resolu
tion of the Hoh Tribal Business Committee, and all checks signed by the treasurer 
shall be countersigned by the chairman. It shall be the duty of the treasurer to 
report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds on 
hand at all regular meetings and at any other time when requested by the Hoh Tribal 
Business Committee, The treasurer will be required to have a surety bond satisfact
ory to the Hoh Tribal Business Committee and the Superintendent or officer in charge 
of the reservation, The surety bond will be obtained at the expense of the tribe,

SEC. 5. The duties of all other officers and committees appointed by the Hoh Tri

bal Business Committee shall be set forth by properly enacted resolutions.

ARTICLE VI  — VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

If any officer of the Hoh Tribe shall die, permanently leave the reservation, or 

shall be found guilty of a felony, or misdemeanor involving dishonesty, in any Ind
ian, State, or Federal Court, the Hoh Tribal Business Committee shall declare the 
position vacant and shall appoint a new member to serve until the next regular elec
tion when a successor shall be elected.

ARTICLE VII — REVIEW

SECTION 1. Any resolution or ordinance enacted by the Hoh Tribal Business Commit
tee which is subject to review under the terms of this constitution shall be present
ed to the Superintendent or officer in charge of the Agency exercising jurisdiction, 
who shall approve or disapprove it within 15 days of its receipt. If approved, it 
shall become effective, but the Superintendent or officer in charge shall send the 
resolution or ordinance bearing his endorsement to the Secretary of the Interior, who 
may, within 90 days after its receipt, rescind it for any cause and shall notify the 
business committee of his veto and his reasons therefor.

SEC. 2. If the Superintendent or officer in charge disapproves any resolution or 
ordinance which is subject to review, he shall immediately notify the Hoh Tribal Bus
iness Committee giving the reasons for his disapproval. The Hoh Tribal Business Com
mittee may appeal his action by referring the resolution or ordinance to the Secre
tary of the Interior. Upon the Secretary's written approval, it shall become effec
tive,

ARTICLE VIII — REFERENDUM

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least twenty-five percent of the eligible 

voters of the Hoh Tribe, or upon written request of the majority of the Hoh Tribal 
Business Committee, the chairman shall call a meeting of the tribe within 15 days 
from the date the petition or request is received, to vote on any enacted or proposed 
ordinance or resolution, A majority of the qualified voters who vote in such a meet
ing shall decide whether the ordinance or resolution shall be in effect, provided 
that at least twenty-five percent of the eligible voters shall vote.

ARTICLE IX  — BILL OF RIGHTS

All members of the Hoh Tribe shall be accorded equal protection of the law under 
this constitution. No member shall be denied any of the rights or guarantees enjoyed 
by citizens under the Constitution of the United States, including but not limited 
to, freedom of religion and conscience, freedom of speech, the right to orderly asso
ciation or assembly, the right to petition for action or the redress of grievances, 
and due process of law.

ARTICLE X  — AMENDMENTS

Amendments to this constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the members 

of the Hoh Tribe attending a regular or special tribal meeting and shall be adopted 
and approved in the same manner as this constitution.

ARTICLE XI  — ADOPTION

This constitution shall be voted on at an election authorized for that purpose by 

the Secretary of the Interior under regulations prescribed for such elections. If 
passed by a majority at an election in which at least thirty percent of those entitled 
to vote cast a ballot, and if approved by the Secretary of the Interior, this consti
tution shall be effective on the date of such approval.

***
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Assistant Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs on April 1, 1969, under delegated authority, the attached Constitution of the 
Hoh Indian Tribe was submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe and was on May 
24, 1969, duly adopted by a vote of 21 for, and 0 against, in an election in which 
at least 30 percent of the 25 entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with 
Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amend
ed by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat, 378).

JOHN W. WEDDEL

Chairman, Election Board

THEODORE HUDSON, SR.

Election Board Member

HERBERT FISHER, SR.

Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I,  Harrison Loesch, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 

United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by the Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat, 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Constitution of 
the Hoh Indian Tribe of Washington,

Approval Recommended:

T.W, Taylor 

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs
 
 

HARRISON LOESCH

 
 Assistant Secretary of the Interior

[SEAL]

Washington, D.C.
Date: July 1, 1969

