 
  
 United States Department of the Interior

IN RCH.Y REFERTO 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 Pacific Regional Office
2800 Cottage Way 
Sacramento, California 95825

Delia M. Sharpe, Attorney
Hoopa Valley Tribal Election Board 
California Indian Legal Services 
324 F Street
Eureka, California 95501

Dear Ms. Sharpe:

MA8 3 1 aUUU

We have received and reviewed the formal results of the Hoopa Valley Tribal Election held on 
March 4, 2008 to amend Article IV, Sectionl (b) of the Hoopa Valley Tribe’s Constitution and 
Bylaws. As a result of a Petition filed by twenty percent of the Tribe’s registered voters, the 
Tribe’s Election Board conducted a special amendment election in accordance with the Tribe’s 
Election Ordinance and Article X. Amendments of Tribe’s Constitution and Bylaws.

As evidenced by the Election Board Certification, dated March 14, 2008, signed by the 
Chairman of the Tribe’s Election Board, and the Tribal Council Certification, dated March 14, 
2008, signed by the Chairman of the Tribal Council, the amendment to Article IV, Sectionl (b). 
of the Tribe’s Constitution and Bylaws, which reduces the membership Blood Quantum 
requirement from 1/4 to 1/8 Hoopa Blood, including all Hoopa Blood, by a vote of 469 “Yes” 
and 418 “No”, was duly adopted by the registered voters of the Tribe. Therefore, by my 
signature on the enclosed Certificate of Approval, the amendment to Article IV, Sectionl (b) is 
approved pursuant to the authority granted to me by Article X, Amendments of the Constitution 
of the Hoopa Valley Tribe.

Returned herewith are copies of the documents submitted with your letters dated March 14 and 
26, 2008. If you have any questions, please contact Fred Doka Jr., Regional Tribal Operations 
Officer, at (916) 978-6067.

Sincerely

Acting Regional Director

Enclosures

cc: Chairman, Hoopa Valley Tribe

Chairman, Hoopa Valley Tribe Election Board 
Chicf, Tribal Government Services Division

United States Department of the Interior

IX RtFi YRFHIR TO
 
  
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 Pacific Regional Office
2800 Cottage Way
Sacramento, California 95825 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL


Pursuant to the authority granted to me by Article X, Amendments of the Constitution of the 
Hoopa Valley Tribe. The Amendment to Article IV, Sectionl,(b) of the Constitution of the 
Hoopa Valley Tribe, California, which was adopted by the qualified voters of the Tribe on 
March 4, 2008, is hereby approved. This approval is effective as of this date; provided that 
nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that 
would be contrary to Federal Law.

Actin^/Regional director

MAR 31, 2008

Date

1 Article IV Membership, Section 1 (b), which has been amended to read: “All children, bom to members of the 
Hoopa Valley Tribe, who are at least one-eighth (1/8) Indian blood. Degree or quantum of blood to be determined 
by adding one-half (1/2) the degree of Indian blood of each parent as shown on the approved Roll Schedules of the 
Hoopa Valley Tribe; provided that, if a parent is not enrolled in the Hoopa Valley Tribe, calculation of degree or 
quantum of blood shall include Indian blood derived from that parent’s direct lineal ancestors) as shown on the 
approved Roll schedules of the Hoopa Valley Tribe.”

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20242

IN REPLY REFER TO :
Tribal Operations

Mr. Norman Tippeconic 
Superintendent, Hoopa Agency 
Hoopa, California 95546

Dear Mr. Tippeconic:

AUG 18 1972

We have received the results of the Hoopa Valley tribal election held 
on June 20, 1972.. The election was called and conducted in accordance 
with the provisions of Article IX the tribe’s constitution which permits 
the voting membership to adopt or reject proposed modifications to that 
document.

We note that Section 3 of Article V, GOVERNING BODY, is silent as to 
whether a candidate is required to reside or own property within the 
district he intends to represent. We have been advised that such 
question was thoroughly discussed while the proposed revision was being 
drafted. Our approval is based on the understanding that a candidate 
may file as a representative for a specific district without regard to 
residence or property holdings within that district provided he meets 
the qualifications set forth in Section 6 of Article VI.

The last sentence of Section 10, Article VI, NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS, 
is not entirely clear. We understand that provision to mean that 
installation may be delayed for any position in which there is an 
unresolved election dispute. However, those who are duly elected and 
certified would be installed within the 10 day period stated in the 
first sentence of Section 10.

As evidenced by the Certification of the Election Board the proposed 
revision of the constitution and bylaws was duly adopted by the voters.

In accordance with 
have reviewed this 
in California. It 
Tribe.

Article IX of the tribe's original constitution, we 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Hoopa Valley Tribe 
is hereby approved and returned for delivery to the
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

OF THE
HOOPA VALLEY TRIBE 
IN CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Hoopa Valley Tribe in California, in order 
to exercise our tribal rights and promote our common welfare do hereby 
ordain and establish this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - PURPOSE

 
 The purpose of this Constitution and Bylaws shall be to protect and 
promote the interests of the Hoopa Valley Indians, to develop coop
erative relations with the agencies of the Federal Government and to 
cooperate with State and local governments. Upon its effective date 
this revised Constitution and Bylaws shall supercede the tribe's 
initial governing document, approved September 4, 1952. All existing 
ordinances, resolutions or any other enactments or policies of the 
tribe, which are not in conflict with the provisions of this revised 

constitution and bylaws shall remain in effect.
 
  
 

ARTICLE II  - NAME

 
 The Tribal organization shall be called "The Hoopa Valley Tribe." 
 

ARTICLE III - TERRITORY


The jurisdiction of the Hoopa Valley Tribe shall extend to all lands 
within the confines of the Hoopa Valley Reservation boundaries as 
established by Executive Order of June 23, 1876, and to such other 
lands as may hereafter be acquired by or for the Hoopa Valley Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Hoopa Valley Tribe shall consist 
as follows:

(a) All persons of Hoopa Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official roll of the Hoopa Valley Tribe as of October 1, 1949;
provided that corrections may be made in the said roll by the business 
council within five years from the adoption and approval of this 
Constitution, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior 
or his authorized representative.

All children, born to members of the Hoopa Valley Tribe, who are 
(b) 

at least one-quarter degree Indian blood, after the effective date 
of this amendment. Degree or quantum of blood to be determined by 
adding one-half the degree of Indian blood of each parent as shown on 
the approved Roll Schedules of the Hoopa Valley Tribe.

Section 2. The business council shall have the power to make rules 
governing the adoption of new members or the termination of member
ship in the Tribe.

Section 3. ENROLLMENT ORDINANCE: The business council shall draft 
an enrollment ordinance setting forth the procedures governing tribal 
membership in accordance with this article. The ordinance shall be 
submitted to a referendum within one year from the effective date 
of this revised constitution and bylaws and shall be in effect only 
when ratified by a tribal referendum and approved by the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs. Changes to such ordinance shall require a further 
vote by the Tribe's general membership and approval by the Commissioner.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. NAME: The governing body of the Hoopa Valley Tribe shall 
Be a council known as the Hoopa Valley Business Council.

Section 2. COMPOSITION: The council shall consist of a chairman, 
and seven (7) other members. A vice-chairman shall be elected by 
the council from within its own membership. A secretary, treasurer, 
and such other employees, committees as are deemed necessary shall 
be either appointed or employed by the council from outside the 

membership of the council.

Section 3. DISTRICTS: The tribal chairman and seven (7) other 
council members shall be elected at large as hereinafter specified 
in Article VI. The Chairman shall represent the membership as a 
whole and one councilman shall be elected to represent each of the 
following districts:

1.  Hostler-Matilton
2.  Soctish-Chenone
3.  Agency
4.  Norton
5.  Campbell
6.  Bald Hill 
7. 

Mesket
 
 

ARTICLE VI - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Starting with the June 1973 election the Chairman shall 
Be elected for a term of 2 years. The other business council members 
shall be elected for terms of two years which shall be staggered: At 
the June 1973 election four council members shall be elected to fill 
the positions on the present council which are presently due to expire 
in June 1973. Three council members shall be elected in 1974 to fill 
the council positions on the council which expire in June 1974.
All councilmembers including those presently serving shall remain in 

ice until their successors are duly elected and installed in office.

Section 2. ELECTION DAY: An election shall be held on the third 
Tuesday of June of each year. In the event a holiday falls on that 
date, or for some other reason it is not advisable to hold the 
election at the specified time, the election board shall designate 
an alternate time to conduct the election no later than the last day 
of June.

Section 3. ELECTION BOARD: The membership shall elect an election 
board composed of 5 members which shall enact an ordinance as set 
forth in Section 4. The terms shall expire as follows; one in one 
year, two in two years, two in three years and their successor shall 
serve three year terms. The candidates in each instance receiving 
the second highest vote total shall serve as alternates for the 
corresponding terms of election board members.
The election board shall select annually from its own membership a 
chairman. The board shall be responsible for screening candidates, 
calling and conducting elections, settling any election disputes, 
certifying election results and installing successful candidates. 
The election board chairman shall administer oaths of office.
The Board shall establish its own rules of procedure. Members of the 
board shall receive fair payment to be set by the council for the 
performance of their duties. The board may levy and collect filing 
fees from candidates to help defray costs of elections. It may also 

require that a fee accompany protests of elections for business council 

members to help defray any costs of recounts or such actions as the 
protest may require. Such fee may be refunded if the aggrieved 
party’s protest is sustained. Members of the board shall be subject 
to the recall provisions of Article VII, Section 3.

Section 4. ELECTION ORDINANCE: The election board shall enact an 
ordinance governing elections and setting forth the procedures to be 
followed in conducting each of the various types of elections.
Such ordinance shall include provisions for secret ballots, absentee 
voting, registration of voters, screening of candidates, and settling 
election disputes. A separate section of the ordinance shall spell 
out the procedure and format to be used whenever it is necessary to 
submit petitions for any purpose to the business council or any office 
or board of the tribe. Wherever practical such ordinance shall include 
provisions of the State or local election regulations. The ordinance 
shall also include provisions for run off elections in case of tie 
votes.

Section 5. NOMINATION PROCEDURE: Candidates shall file for a specific 
position by submitting to the election board a nominating petition 
signed by not less than (5) registered voters. A voter may sign only 
one petition. Petitions for nomination shall be filed with the clerk 
of the election board at least thirty (30) days prior to the election 
in which the candidate intends to compete.

shall be the duty of the election board to screen all candidates 

and post in public places on the reservation, the names of all 
candidates who have met the above qualifications and the position for

which they have filed. Such lists shall be posted at least twenty- 
five (25) days prior to the election. Copies of the sample ballot 
shall be mailed to all registered voters.

Section 6. QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES: Any member of the tribe 
may announce his or her candidacy for a specific position on the 
business council provided the following qualifications are met: 
(a) Must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age by the date of 
the election in which he desires to compete.
(b)  Must have (1) physically resided within the boundaries of the 
Hoopa Valley Reservation for at least one (1) year immediately prior 
to the election date or (2) owned land within said boundaries for 
said one (1) year period and resided within the area shown by a 
circle drawn on a map representing a one hundred (100) mile radius 
from the tribal office building. The election board shall rule on 
whether any prospective candidate meets residence or any other quali
fications specified in this Article.
(c)  Must not have been convicted of a felony or misdemeanor involving 
moral terpitude such as, but not limited to, fraud, embezzlement, 
theft. Provided, that persons who have completed their sentence 
for such conviction at least ten (10) years prior to the date of the 
election in which they intend to run for office, may file as 
candidates.

(d)  Must be bondable.

Section 7. QUALIFICATIONS OF VOTERS: Any member of the Tribe who 
will be at least eighteen years of age on election day shall 
be eligible to vote, provided he has duly registered.

Section 8. ABSENTEE BALLOTS: Absentee ballots shall be provided 
upon request to all non-resident registered voters and other registered 
voters who advise the election board that they will be away from the 
reservation on election day.

Section 9. OATH OF OFFICE: Each successful candidate elected to 
the business council shall take an oath of office prior to assuming 
the duties of such position, by which oath he shall pledge himself 
to support and defend the tribe’s constitution and bylaws. The 
following form of oath of office shall be administered by the 
Chairman of the election board: ”I __________________, do solemnly
swear (or affirm) that I will carry out faithfully and impartially 
the duties of my office to the best of my ability, that I will 
promote and protect the best interests of my tribe, in accordance 
with its constitution and bylaws."

Section 10. INSTALLATION: Successful candidate shall be installed 
in office within ten (10) days following certification of election 
results. Installation of any candidate for a particular position may 
be postponed, however, until such time as there is a determination of 

any dispute or election for that position.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VACANCIES, REMOVAL, RECALL AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. If any member of the business council or other elected 
official shall die, resign, be removed or recalled from office, or 
shall be found guilty while in office of a felony or misdemeanor 
involving moral terpitude in any Indian, State or Federal Court, or 
if he shall miss three (3) consecutive regularly scheduled meetings 
of the council without being excused by that body, the business 
council shall declare the position vacant. The first sub-councilman 
of the district affected shall fill the unexpired term. In the absence 
of a first sub-councilman the second sub-councilman shall fill the 
unexpired term. In the absence of any subcouncilman the district 
affected shall elect to fill the unexpired term. In the case of other 
elected officials where alternates are selected vacancies shall be 
filled as in case of sub-councilmen.

Section 2. REMOVAL: The business council may by five (5) affirmative 
votes, expel any member for neglect of duty or gross misconduct. 
Before any vote for expulsion is taken on the matter, such member or 
official shall be provided a written statement of the charges against 
him at least five (S) days before the meeting of the business council 
before which he is to appear, and an opportunity to answer any and

all charges at such designated council meeting. The decision of the 

business council shall be final.

Section 3. RECALL: Upon receipt of a petition signed by one-third 
(1/3) of the number of voters, who were registered to vote in the last 
election, calling for the recall of any member of the council or 
election board, it shall be the duty of the election board to call and 
conduct within thirty (30) days an election on such recall. Recall 
shall be effective only if a majority of the tribe's registered voters 
shall vote in favor of such recall. Once a member has faced a recall 
attempt, no further recall action may be brought against him, until 
at least one (1) year has passed. No member of the council shall 
be subject to recall action within the first six (6) months of his 
term.

Section 4. REFERENDUM: Upon receipt of a petition signed by one- 
third (1/3) of the number who participated in the last election or 
upon receipt of a resolution of the business council, the election 
board shall call and conduct within thirty (30) days an election 
on any enacted or proposed enactment of the council, or any proposal 
initiated by the voters. Should that measure fail, it cannot be 
reconsidered until at least one (1) year has passed. Should it pass, 
the council is bound by that decision. Any ordinance submitted to 
referendum for ratification can only be amended by like action.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Section 1. The Hoopa Valley Tribe, in exercising its powers of 
self-government, shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, 
or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of 
the people peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress of 
grievances;

(b)  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers, and effects against unreasonable search and siezures, 
nor issue warrants, but upon probable cause supported by oath or 
affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched 
and the person or thing to be seized;

(c)  Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in 
jeopardy;

(d)  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against 
himself;

(e) Take any private property for a public use without just compensa

ion.

(f)  Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a 
speedy and public trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have 
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and at his 
own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

(g) Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel 
and unusual punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any 
one offense any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for 
a term of six (6) months or a fine of $500.00 or both;

(h) Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection 
of its laws or deprive any person of liberty or property without due 
process of law;

(i)  Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or

(j) Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprison
ment the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than 
six (6) persons.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The business council shall have the following powers 
subject to any limitations imposed by Federal statutes or by the 
Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To administer all tribal property. Toward this end a land 
assignment ordinance shall be submitted for ratification to a referen
dum vote within one year of the effective date of this revised 
constitution and bylaws.

(b)  To borrow money from the Indian credit fund or from any other 
Federal or State Agency, and to pledge or assign future tribal income 
as security for such loans.

(c)  To collect and expend any Hoopa Valley Tribal funds within the 
exclusive control of the tribe and to recommend the expenditure of any 
other tribal funds.

(d)  To purchase in the name of the Hoopa Valley Tribe any land or 
other property the council may deem beneficial to said Hoopa Valley 
Indians.

To enforce the protection of tribal property, wild life, and 
(e) 

natural resources of the Hoopa Valley Tribe in accordance with a 
conservation ordinance which shall be enacted within one year from the 
effective date of this revised constitution.

(f)  1. To provide assessments or license fees upon non-members doing 
business or obtaining special privileges within the reservation, 
subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his 
authorized representative.

2.  To promulgate and enforce assessments or license fees upon 

members exercising special privileges or profiting from the general 
resources of the reservation.

(g)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments on 
behalf of the tribe.

(h)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

(i)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 
lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets.

(j)  To exclude from the restricted land of the Hoopa Valley Indians 

persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under ordinances

which shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs or his authorized representative.

(k)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of 
members of the Hoopa Valley Indians.

(1)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and general 
welfare of the Hoopa Valley Indians by regulating the conduct of 
trade and the use and disposition of property upon the reservation, 
provided that any ordinance directly affecting non-members of the Hoopa 
Valley Tribe shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs or his authorized representative.

(m)  To confer with the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and heads of 
other Federal agencies, regarding all appropriation estimates and 
budgets for the benefit of the Tribe prior to their submission to the 
Office of Management and Budget and Congress.

(n)  To establish a tribal court through the necessary ordinances and 
resolutions in the event that State law and order jurisdiction on the 

Hoopa Valley Reservation is retroceded to the United States.

(o)  To establish a housing authority.

(p)  To create subordinate bodies for the operation of economic 
enterprises to benefit the tribe.

(q) To negotiate and conclude contracts for economic purposes except 
where tribal assets are involved outside of the approved annual 
budget, in excess of $100,000, during any budget and year. Contracts 
in excess of such amount shall be submitted to the tribal membership 
for approval by a referendum vote.

Section 2. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Hoopa Valley 
Tribe but not expressly referred to in this constitution shall not be 
abridged, but may be exercised by the members of the Hoopa Valley 
Tribe through the adoption of appropriate amendments to this 
Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE X - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this constitution and bylaws -may be proposed by either 
the following documents being submitted to the tribal election board 
along with the desired modification:

(a)  A resolution in which at least six (6) of the business council 
members have voted in favor of the proposal.

(b)  A petition signed by at least twenty (20) per cent of a tribes 
registered voters.

on receipt of the resolution provided for in (a) above or a valid 
petition referred to in (b) above, the election board shall call and 
conduct a special amendment election in accordance with this Article 
and provisions set forth in the tribal election ordinance. The

specific language which will become part of the constitution and bylaws, 
if such amendment is adopted and approved, shall appear on the ballot 
including language changes of any other parts of the governing 
document that will be affected by such modification. If at such 
election the proposed amendment is adopted by a majority of those 
voting in the election and if at least thirty (30) per cent of the 
registered voters shall vote, that amendment shall be submitted to 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and if approved by him, shall there
upon take effect.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE HOOPA VALLEY TRIBE

ARTICLE XI - BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. CHAIRMAN: The chairman shall preside over all meetings 
of the council and of the tribe's general membership. He shall 
perform all duties of the chairman and exercise any authority 
delegated to him by the business council. The specific duties and 
responsibilities of the chairman and other members of the council shall 
be spelled out in appropriate ordinance of the business council. The 
chairman shall vote only in case of a tie.

Section 2. VICE-CHAIRMAN: The vice-chairman shall assist the chairman 
when called upon to do so. In the absence of the chairman, he 

shall preside, and when so presiding shall have all the rights, 
privileges and duties, as well as the responsibilities of the chairman.

Section 3. SECRETARY: The secretary shall conduct all correspondence 
and keep a complete and accurate record of all matters transacted 
at council and committee meetings. It shall be his duty to submit 
promptly to the Superintendent of the Hoopa Agency, copies of all 
minutes of regular and special meetings of the business council and 
the tribe's general membership. Other duties shall be spelled out in 
a job description.

Section 4. TREASURER: The treasurer shall be the custodian of all 
monies which may come into the control of the business council. He 
shall pay out money in accordance with ordinances and resolutions of 
the business council. He shall keep an account of all receipts and 
disbursements, and shall report same to the business council monthly. 
He shall be bonded in such an amount as the business council may by 
resolution provide, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 
The books of the council treasurer shall be subject to audit or 
inspection at the direction of the business council or the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs.
The Hoopa Agency of the Bureau of Indian Affairs shall be responsible 
for the custody and disbursement of tribal funds in the event the 
treasurer does not possess an adequate bond. The treasurer shall 
perform other duties as assigned in accordance with the ordinance 

mentioned in Section 1 of this Article.

Section 5. APPOINTIVE OFFICERS: The duties of all committees and 
officers appointed by the business council shall be clearly defined 
by resolution of the business council at the time of their creation 
or appointment. Such committees or officers shall report from time 
to time, as required, to the business council, and their activities 
and decisions shall be subject to review by the business council upon 
the petition of any person aggrieved.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

 
 Section 1. Regular meetings of the business council shall be held 
on the first and third Thursday of each month in a hall designated by 
the business council. Special meetings may be called by written 
notice signed by the chairman and shall be called by him upon 
receipt of a petition signed by at least (5) council members, and when 
so called, the business council shall have power to transact business 
as in regular meetings.
General council meetings shall be called in like manner upon ten (10) 
days notice.

Section 2. QUORUM: No business shall be transacted unless a quorum 
is present. A quorum shall consist of any five (5) of the eight (8) 
council members.

Section 3. ORDER OF BUSINESS: The following order of business is 
established For aTT meetings but may be changed if deemed necessary:

(a)  Call to order by Chairman
(b)  Roll call
(c)  Ascertainment of a quorum
(d)  Reading of minutes of the last meeting
(e)  Adoption of minutes by a vote or common consent
(f)  Unfinished business
(g)  New business
(h)  Non-agenda items
(i)  Adjournment

Section 4. TRIBAL LEGISLATION: Any enactment of the business council 
which is "of a temporary nature or for a specific one-time use shall 
take the form of a RESOLUTION. Enactments of a permanent nature 
which are to be effective over an extended period of time shall be 
embodied in ORDINANCES.

Section 5. REPORT OF MEETINGS: It shall be the duty of each member 
of the business council to make reports concerning the proceedings of 
the business council to the members of his district.

Section 6. SALARIES: The business council may prescribe by 
resolution such salaries for officers, committees, tribal employees, 
or members of the council as it deems advisable from such funds as 
may be available. Provided any changes in the rates of per diem for 
attending council or committee meetings shall not be effective until 
one (1) year from the date of such action.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 This constitution and bylaws shall become effective upon approval 
by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs following its adoption by a 
majority of those who vote in an election called for that purpose. 
Provided at least thirty (30) per cent of those Hoopa Valley Tribal 
members entitled to vote shall cast ballots in such election.
Upon the effective date of this constitution and bylaws, the 
original constitution and bylaws adopted on May 13, 1950 and approved 
by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs on September 4, 1952, is 
hereby expressly revoked.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 Pursuant to the authority granted to me by Article IX of the tribe's original 
Constitution This Constitution and Bylaws of the Hoopa Valley Tribe in 
California is hereby approved.

. 
Acting Deputy

Commissioner

Washington, D. C.

Date: AUG 18 1972
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE
HOOPA VALLEY TRIBE 
IN CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Hoopa Valley Tribe in California, in order 
to exercise our tribal rights and promote our common welfare do 
hereby ordain arid establish this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I - PURPOSE

 
 The purpose shall be to protect and promote the interests of the 
Hoopa Valley Indians, to develop cooperative relations with the 
agencies of the federal government and to cooperate with state and 
local governments.
 
  
 

ARTICLE II - NAME

 
 This tribal organization shall be called "The Hoopa Valley Tribe." 
 

ARTICLE III - TERRITORY


The jurisdiction of the Hoopa Valley Tribe shall extend to all lands 
within the confines of the Hoopa Valley Reservation boundaries as 
established by Executive Order of June 23, 1876, and to such other 
lands as may hereafter be acquired by or for the Hoopa Valley Indians 
of California.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Hoopa Valley Tribe shall consist as 
follows:

(a)  All persons of Hoopa Indian blood whose names appear on the 

official roll of the Hoopa Valley Tribe as of October 1, 1949; 
provided that corrections may be made in the said roll by the 
business council within five years from the adoption and 
approval of this constitution, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

(b)  All children, born to members of the Hoopa Valley Tribe, who 
are at least one-quarter degree Indian blood. (See attached 
Amendment I).

Sec. 2. The business council shall have the power to make rules 
governing the adoption of new members or the termination of member
ship in the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Hoopa Valley Indians of the 
Hoopa Valley Reservation shall be a council known as the Hoopa 
Valley Business Council.

Sec. 2. The business council shall consist of seven councilmen to 
be elected from the districts as set forth hereafter.

Sec. 3. The representation from the districts hereby designated 
shall be as follows: Hostler and Matilton Districts, one councilman; 
Soctish and Chenone Districts, one councilman; Agency District, 
Norton District, Campbell District, Bald Hill District, and Mesket 
District, one councilman each.

Sec. 4. The business council shall have the power to change the 
districts and the representation from each district based upon 
community organization or otherwise, as deemed advisable, such 
change to be made by ordinance, but the total number of councilmen 
shall not be changed, as provided for in Section 2 of Article V of 
this Constitution. (See Ordinance dated July 1, 1958, and Modifi
cation of Ordinance, dated July 1, 1958).

Sec. 5. The business council so organized shall elect from within 
its own number (1) a chairman and (2) a vice chairman, and from 
within or without its own membership (3) a secretary, and (4) a 
treasurer, and may appoint or employ from within or without its 
own membership such other officers and committees as may be deemed 
necessary.

Sec. 6. No person shall be a candidate for membership in the business 
council unless he shall be a member of the Hoopa Valley Tribe of the 
Hoopa Valley Reservation, and shall have resided or own land in the 
district of his candidacy for a period of one year next preceding the 
election and be at least 21 years of age.

Sec. 7. The business council of the Hoopa Valley Tribe of the Hoopa 
Valley Reservation shall be the sole judge of the qualifications of 
its members.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. The first election of business council under this 
constitution shall be called, held, and supervised by the present 
business council within 30 days after the ratification and approval 
of this constitution. At the first election, the candidate receiving 
the highest number of votes in the Mesket, Campbell, and Norton 
Districts shall serve 2 years. The candidates receiving the highest 
number of votes in the Bald Hill District, Agency District, the 
Soctish and Chenone Districts, the Hostler and Matilton Districts 
shall serve 1 year; and thereafter elections for the business council 
shall be held every year and shall be called at least 60 days prior 
to the expiration of terms of office. The term of office of a 
councilman shall be for a period of 2 years unless otherwise provided 
herein.

Sec. 2. The candidate receiving the greatest number of votes in his 
district shall be designated as the."councilman" to serve as stipu
lated in the preceding section; the candidate receiving the second 
greatest number of votes in his district shall be designated as 
"first sub-councilman" and may participate and vote in council 
meetings if the "councilman" is absent; and the candidate receiving 
the third greatest number of votes in his district shall be desig
nated as "second sub-councilman," and may participate and vote in 
council meetings from which both the "councilman" and the "first 
sub-councilman" are absent. The terms of office for sub-councilman 
shall coincide with the terms stipulated for the councilman.

Sec. 3. The business council or an election board appointed by the 
council, shall determine rules and regulations governing all elections.

Sec, 4. All elections shall be by secret ballot.

Sec. 5. Any qualified member of the Hoopa Valley Tribe may announce 
his or her candidacy for the business council within the district of 
his or her residence or in which he or she owns land by petition 
signed by not less than 5 legal voters. A voter may sign only one 
petition. Petitions for nomination shall be filed with the secretary 
of the business council at least 10 days prior to the election for 
which the candidate makes his or her petition. It shall be the duty 
of the secretary to post in a public place in at least one place in 
the district affected, at least one week before the election the 
names of all candidates for the business council who have met these 
requirements.

See. 6. No person shall be a candidate for membership in the 
business council unless he shall be a member of the Hoopa Valley 
Tribe of the Hoopa Valley Reservation, and shall have resided or 
owns land in the district of his candidacy for a period of one year 
next preceding the election and be at least 21 years of age.

Sec. 7. Each member of the business council and each officer or 
subordinate officer, elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an 
oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath 
he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of 
the United States and this constitution and bylaws. The following 
form of oath of office shall be given: "I .........................., do solemnly
swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the Constitution 
of the United States against all enemies; that 1 will carry out 
faithfully and impartially the duties of my office to the best of 
my ability; that I will promote and protect the best interests of 
my tribe," in accordance with this constitution and bylaws."

Sec. 8. Any member of the Hoopa Valley Tribe of the Hoopa Valley 
Reservation who is 21 years of age or over, and who has maintained 
legal residence for at least six months on the Hoopa Valley Reser
vation shall be entitled to vote.

Sec. 9. The business council or a board appointed by the business 
council shall designate the polling places and appoint all election 
officials".
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE 

 
 Section 1. If a councilman or official shall die, resign, be removed 
or recalled from office, permanently leave the reservation, or shall 
be found guilty of a felony or misdemeanor involving dishonesty in 
any Indian, State, or Federal Court, the business council shall 
declare the position vacant; the first sub-councilman in the district 
affected shall fill the unexpired term. In the absence of a first 
sub-councilman the second sub-councilman shall fill the unexpired 
term. In the absence of any sub-councilman the district affected 
shall elect to fill the unexpired term.

Sec. 2. The business council may by four affirmative votes expel 
any member for neglect of duty or gross misconduct. Before any vote 
for expulsion is taken on the matter, such member or official shall 
be given a written statement of the charges against him at least 5 
days before the meeting of the business council before which he is 
to appear, and an opportunity to answer any and all charges at such 
designated council meeting. The decision of the business council 
shall be final.

Sec. 3. Upon receipt of a petition signed by one-third of the 
eligible voters in any district calling for the recall of any 
member of the council, representing said district, it shall be the 
duty of the council to call an election on such recall petition. 
No member may be recalled in any such election unless at least 30 
percent of the legal voters of the district shall vote at such 
election.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS AND DUTIES OF BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The business council shall have the following powers 
subject to any limitations imposed by Federal statutes or by the 
Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To administer all tribal property by ordinance or resolution 

subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
or his authorized representative.

(b)  To borrow money, subject to the approval of the Commissioner 

of Indian Affairs, from the Indian credit fund or from any 
other Federal or state agency, and to pledge or assign future 
tribal income as security for such loans.

(c)  To collect and expend any Hoopa Valley Tribal Funds within 

the exclusive control of the tribe and to recommend the 
expenditure of any other tribal funds.

(d)  To purchase in the name of the Hoopa Valley Tribe any land or 

other property the council may deem beneficial to said Hoopa 
Valley Indians.

(e)  To enforce approved regulations for the protection of tribal 

property, wild life, and natural resources of the Hoopa Valley 
Indians.

(f) 

1. To provide assessments or license fees upon non-members
doing business or obtaining special privileges within the 
reservation, subject to the approval of the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs or his authorized representative.

2. To promulgate and enforce assessments or license fees 
upon members exercising special privileges or profiting from 
the general resources of the reservation,

(g)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments on 

behalf of the tribe.

(h)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the tribe and of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

(i)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of 

tribal lands, interests in Lands, or other tribal assets.

(j)  To exclude from the restricted land of the Hoopa Valley Indians 

persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under ordinances 
which shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs or his authorized representative.

(k)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject to 

the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, governing 
the conduct of members of the Hoopa Valley Indians.

(1)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and general 

welfare of the Hoopa Valley Indians by regulating the conduct 
of trade and the use and disposition of property upon the reser
vation, provided that any ordinance directly affecting non
members of the Hoopa Valley Indians shall be subject to the 
approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his authorized 
representative.

(m)  To confer with the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the repre
sentative of his Bureau upon all appropriation estimates and 
budgets for the benefit of the tribe prior to their submission 
to the Bureau of the Budget and Congress.

(n)  To establish a tribal court through the necessary ordinances 

and resolutions until State law and order jurisdiction is 
extended to the Hoopa Reservation.

Sec. 2. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Hoopa Valley 
Tribe but net expressly referred to in this constitution shall not 
be abridged, but may be exercised by the members of the Hoopa Valley 
Tribe through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and constitutional 
amendments.

Sec. 3. The business council of the Hoopa Valley Tribe may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated by any duly 
authorized official or agency of the federal or state government or 
by the members of the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. Amendments to the constitution and bylaws may be ratified 
and approved in the same manner as this constitution and bylaws. 
Whenever the business council shall, by a vote of five or more 
members, call for the submission of an amendment, the business council 
shall call an election upon the proposed amendment. If at such 
election the amendment is adopted by a majority of the qualified 
voters of the tribe voting thereon and if at least 30 percent of 
those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, such amendment 
shall be submitted to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and if 
approved by him, shall thereupon take effect.
 
 

ARTICLE X - ELIMINATION OF APPROVAL

 
 Section 1. The Hoopa Valley Tribe may request the elimination of 
the requirement of approval of the Secretary of the Interior, the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his authorized representative at 
the expiration of five years from the date of the approval of this 
constitution and bylaws.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE HOOPA VALLEY INDIANS

ARTICLE I - BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Chairman of the Business Council. The Chairman of 
the business council shall preside over all meetings of the council 
and of the tribes. He shall perform all duties of the Chairman and 
exercise any authority delegated to him by the business council.

Sec 2. Vice Chairman of the Business Council. The Vice-Chairman 
of the business council shall assist the Chairman when called upon 
to do so. In the absence of the Chairman, he shall preside, and 
when so presiding shall have all the rights, privileges and duties, 
as well as the responsibilities of the Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary of the Business Council. The Secretary of the 
business council shall conduct all correspondence and keep a complete 
and accurate record of all matters transacted at council and 
committee meetings. It shall be his duty to submit promptly to the 
Superintendent of the jurisdiction and to the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs copies of all minutes of regular and special meetings of the 
business council and the tribes.

Sec. 4. Treasurer of the Business Council. The Treasurer of the 
business council shall be the custodian of all moneys which may come

into the control of the business council. He shall pay out money 
in accordance with ordinances and resolutions of the business
council. He shall keep an account of all receipts and disbursements, 
and shall report same to the business council at each regular meeting.
He shall be bonded in such an amount as the business council may by 
resolution provide, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 
The books of the council Treasurer shall be subject to audit or
inspection at the direction of the business council or the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs. The California Indian Agency shall be responsible 
for the custody and disbursement of tribal funds until the Treasurer 
obtains an adequate bond.

Sec. 5. Appointive Officers. The duties of all appointive committees 
and officers appointed by the business council shall be clearly 
defined by resolution of the business council at the time of their 
creation or appointment. Such committees or officers shall report 
from time to time, as required, to the business council, and their 
activities and decisions shall be subject to review by the business 
council upon the petition of any person aggrieved.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

 
 Section 1. Regular meetings of the business council shall be held 
on the first Thursday of each month in a hall designated by the 
business council.

Special meetings may be called by written notice signed by the 
Chairman, or by a petition signed by four council members, and when 
so called, the business council shall have power to transact business 
as in regular meetings.

Sec. 2. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is present.
A quorum shall consist of five councilmen.

Sec. 3. The following order of business is established for all 
meetings: 

(a) Call to order by Chairman.

(b) Roll call.

(c) Ascertainment of a quorum.

(d) Reading of the minutes of the last meeting.
 
 

 
 
 (e)  Adoption of minutes by a vote or common consent,

(f)  Unfinished business,

(g)  New business

(h)  Adjournment.

Sec, 4. Report of Meetings. It shall be the duty of each member 
of the business council to make reports concerning the proceedings 
of the business council to the members of the district from which 
he is elected.

Sec. 5. Salaries. The business council may prescribe by resolution 
such salaries for officers, committees, or members of the council 
as it deems advisable from such funds as may be available.
 
 

ARTICLE III - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 This constitution and bylaws shall be in full force and effect 
whenever a majority of the adult voters of the Hoopa Valley Tribe 
voting in an election called by the business council, in which at 
least 30% of the eligible voters vote, shall have ratified such 
constitution and bylaws, and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs shall 
have approved same.

ADOPTED BY TOTE OF THE COMMUNITY MAY 13, 1950.

APPROVED BY THE COMMISSIONER OF INDIAN AFFAIRS SEPTEMBER 4, 1952.
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOOPA VALLEY TRIBE 
IN CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT I

 
 Article IV, Section 1(b) of the Constitution and Bylaws of the

Hoopa Valley Tribe in California is amended to read as follows:

"1(b) All children of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of

Hoopa Indian blood born to members of the Hoopa Valley 

Tribe after the effective date of this amendment. Degree

or quantum of blood to be determined by adding one-half

the degree of Indian blood of each parent as shown on the

approved Roll Schedules of the Hoopa Valley Tribe."
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 Pursuant to the authority granted to me in Article IX of the Consti

tution and Bylaws of the Hoopa Valley Tribe in California, the

foregoing amendment to Article IV, Section 1(b) of the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Hoopa Valley Tribe in California, adopted by a 

vote of 178 for, and 36 against in an election held on June 25, 1963, 

in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast ballots, is 

approved.

August 9, 1963

Washington, D C.
 
  
  
 

(SGD) GRAHAM HOLMES

 
 Acting Commissioner 
 

 
 
 