Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Hoopa Business Council 
(Hupa People, 1933)

The Hupa people inhabit the Hoopa Valley Reservation in Humboldt 
County, California, situated along the Trinity River. The name “Hupa” 
derives from the Yurok name for the Hoopa Valley. Encompassing 
some 85,445 acres, their reservation is the largest in the state, and 
their population is also the most substantial of all native California 
tribal groups—about one thousand in the early nineteenth century and 
about twenty-five hundred in 2005.

Historically, the Hupa had no formal political infrastructure. The 
basic social unit was the family, with several families typically join
ing together to form a larger social entity. Like many native peoples in 
California, their lands and resources were vulnerable to exploitation 
and dispossession, especially after gold was discovered in 1848. As a 
result, the Hupa signed three treaties with the United States—in 1851, 
1862, and 1864—although only the 1864 treaty, which established 
peace, friendship, and the reservation’s current boundaries, is today 
considered by both parties to have the hallmarks of a valid treaty 
(Deloria and DeMallie 1999, vol. 1, 231-32).

The final treaty, negotiated by Hupa, South Fork, Redwood, and 
Grouse Creek Indians, as well as Austin Wiley, California superinten
dent of Indian Affairs, declared in article one that the United States 
“by these presents doth agree and obligate itself to set aside for res
ervation purposes for the sole use and benefit of the tribes of Indians 
herein named, or such tribes as may hereafter avail themselves of the 
benefit of this treaty, the whole of Hoopa valley, to be held and used 
for the sole benefit of the Indians whose names are hereunto affixed 
as the representatives of their tribes” (ibid., 231).

In 1864 Congress also authorized the president to confirm a tract 
of land specifically for the Hupa people (13 Stat. 39). By executive 
order, President U. S. Grant formally set aside the reservation on June 
23, 1876. This area was further expanded by another executive order 
in 1891. By 1916, according to the local superintendent of Indian 
Affairs, the Hoopa Valley Indians had organized a representative 
tribal council composed of Indians living on the reservation. The 
“Hoopa Council,” as it was called, was the authorized body for all of 
the Indians of the reservation.

The Hupa also had to deal with land allotments in the early twen
tieth century. Their situation was complicated by the fact that some 
Klamath River, or Yurok, Indians were claiming an interest in the lands 
and resources of the original Hoopa Valley Reservation. These events 

played a role in the Hupa people’s 1933 decision to adopt a constitution 
and bylaws to govern the “bona fide” residents of the twelve-square- 
mile Hoopa reservation. The three-member Hoopa Business Council 
and the subcouncil (three members from each of the seven districts) had 
the “freedom and liberty ... to carry out the wishes of the majority of 
the tribe in all cases, with the sole object of promoting the social, finan
cial, tribal funds, and disbursements, industrial, allotment and general 
welfare of the tribe.” The Council was to “diligently and wholeheart
edly endeavor to co-operate with the Bureau of Indian Affairs.”

The tribe’s constitution was approved by the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs on November 20, 1933. This document was superseded 
by a constitution adopted on May 13, 1950, which was approved by 
the BIA on September 4, 1952.

Cohen, Felix S., Papers. Box 6, folder no. 89 (Yale Collection of Western 
Americana, Beinecke Rare Book and Manuscript Collection, New Haven, 
Conn.).

Wallace, William J. “Hupa, Chilula, and Whilkut.” In Handbook of North 
American Indians, gen. ed. William C. Sturtevant. Vol. 8, California, vol. ed. 
Robert F. Heizer (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian Institution, 1978), 164-79.

Constitution and Bylaws of the Hoopa 
Business Council

Article 1. This organization shall be known as the Hoopa Business Council.

Article 2. The members of the Business Council shall be elected to act 
for the tribe, with the power of rendering decisions for them after matters that 
[they] have taken under consideration with the sub-council; excepting in mat
ters of minor importance not effecting Article 14, where questions of depart
mental policies are involved; they shall have the freedom and liberty, without 
consulting the sub-council, to act and pass upon such matters of minor charac
ter as may be presented to them by the superintendent, Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs or any member of the tribe.

The views of the tribe having been determined, the business council shall 
be cloaked with authority to act in any and all tribal matters, including tribal 
claims of every nature.

Regardless of personal opinion, it shall be the express and explicit duty of 
the business council to carry out the witness of the majority of the tribe in all 
cases, with the sole object of promoting the social, financial, tribal funds, and 
disbursements, industrial, allotment and general welfare of the tribe; to make 
such recommendation to the executive, judicial, and legislative branches of the 
government, or to any others that the business council and the tribe may deem 
advisable; and the business council shall at all times diligently and wholeheart
edly endeavor to co-operate with the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

Article 3. The business council shall be composed of seven enrolled mem
bers of the Hoopa tribe; bona field residents of Humboldt County, California, 
and twenty-one years of age or over.

Article 4. The election of members of the business council shall be held at 

district councils as follows:

A majority of the lawful votes cast in each district shall determine the elec

tion of the business councilmen and sub-councilmen.

Ballot votes shall govern all elections unless otherwise ordered by the 

business council.

Four votes cast by duly elected councilmen shall constitute a majority suf

ficient to carry a motion, presented at the business council meetings.

Article 5. Notice of election, stating the place and hour of voting shall be 

posted not less than two weeks in advance.

A. The business councilmen shall preside over the election held in his [sic] 

district and take extra precaution to insure a fair election.

Article 6. Thereafter, elections shall be held every two years, in the month 

of May, the day to be determined by the business council.

Each district shall elect one councilman and three sub-councilmen accord
ing to the provisions of this constitution, the term of office being for a period 
of two years.

Article 7. The regular meeting of the business council shall be held on the 

first Thursday of each month, at the Agency Field district.

Special meetings may be called by the chairman either on his own motion 
or on written request of four or more members of the business council; such 
calls and requests stating the purpose of the meetings.

The business councilmen in each district shall meet with his or her sub

councilmen the last Thursday of each month.

Article 8. Any suggestions, complaints or requests shall be made to busi
ness councilmen or sub-councilmen in writing and shall be signed by parties 
making such assertions.

A.  If a vacancy should occur in the position of a councilman, it shall remain 
discretionary with the district to fill out the unexpired term at a special election 
held at the district where the vacancy occurs.
B.  The business councilmen shall confer with his sub-councilmen to deter
mine a substitute in case of his temporary absence.

C.  If a vacancy occurs in the sub-council, the councilman shall call a meeting 
of his district, and elect someone to fill such a vacancy by a majority of votes 
in the district.

Article 9. Before assuming their places on the business council, members 

elected shall subscribe to the following oath or affirmation of office:

I, _____, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will support and defend the con
stitution of the United States against all enemies, and faithfully and impar
tially carry out the duties of my office to the best of my ability, and will 
co-operate with the Bureau of Indian Affairs in all efforts to promote and 
protect the Indians of the Hoopa reservation, and to assist them in every way 
towards better citizenship and progress.

Article 10. At the first meeting following election, a chairman, vice
chairman, secretary, treasurer, or any other officer needed to transact busi
ness shall be elected.

Five members of the council shall constitute a quorum for the transaction 

of business.

Article 11. Any official or employee of the Bureau of Indian Affairs, or 
anyone else who may have business with the business council sufficient to war
rant his presence may attend the meeting of the business council to and advise 
with them on matters affecting the tribe.[sic]

Article 12. The secretary of the Business Council shall keep the minutes 
of all regular and special meetings, and include therein all business transacted 
by the Business Council. He shall file one copy at the agency headquarters, one 
shall be forwarded to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and one copy shall 
be filed by the Secretary for council reference.

Article 13. Any member of the business council shall be subject to recall 
from office for reasonable cause upon investigation by the sub-council and 
approval of the business council.

Any sub-councilman may be subject to recall, for willfully neglecting his 
or her duties, or for any act detrimental to the welfare of the tribe, or by a peti
tion signed by not less than 55% of the lawful voters of his district.

Article 14. Matters of great importance to the tribe, which the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs, superintendent, or the business council believes should be 
referred to a general tribal council, shall be so referred.

Article 15. The office of business councilmen shall be strictly honorary 
and without compensation, except when valuable or meritorious services are 
rendered by any member of the business council in the discharge of his duties, 
in which case claim may be made for compensation. Before payment any such 
claim must be approved by the business council.

Article 16. This constitution and by-laws may be amended at any regular or 

special business council meeting; subject to the approval of the sub-council.

Article 17. It shall be the duties of sub-councilmen to investigate all com
plaints, requests, or assertions by any member within his district, and to present 
the same to the business councilman in written form by their councilman.

The superintendent shall assist the council in the promotion of a high stan

dard of morals within the tribe.

He shall submit to them a statement of all funds obtained from the sale 
of land, timber, rights of way, mining royalties, or any money that may have 
accrued from any other sources pertaining to the rights of the tribe.

A copy of monthly disbursements shall be given to the council for refer

ence and consideration.

He shall see that all necessary literature for conducting of the business 

council’s affairs are properly typed or mimeographed.

Article 18. This constitution shall be in full force and effect to govern the 
Hoopa tribe and business council on and after the date it is approved by the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs at Washington, D.C.

Signed by:

Edward Marshall, Chairman, 
Gilbert Marshall, Secretary.

