Constitution of the Hopi 
Council of New Oraibi 
(Hopi People, 1933)

Historically, the Hopi, or “peaceful people,” did not constitute a single 
tribe in the political sense since they inhabited several major autono
mous villages—Walpi (First Mesa), Shungopovi (Second Mesa), and 
Oraibi (Third Mesa)—and a host of minor communities. Each princi
pal village is led by a kikmongwi. These traditional leaders hold their 
positions for life and are the spiritual guides as well for their respec
tive communities.

Today the Hopi occupy lands in northeastern Arizona between 
the Colorado River and the Rio Grande. As the westernmost Puebloan 
village, the Hopi, because of their geographic remoteness from the 
eastern Pueblo communities, did not face the same sustained level of 
cultural absorption by the Spanish and later the Mexicans. When the 
United States routed Mexico in the 1840s and gradually became the 
dominant military presence in the region, Hopi fortunes turned.

The Hopi Reservation was established by presidential order in 
1882, and trading posts, epidemics, railroads, missionaries, federal 
policies of allotment and assimilation, and other native nations (espe
cially the Navajo) all had a gradual but significant impact on Hopi 
lands, identities, and governing structures. As these forces coalesced, 
they generated increasing conflict within some villages, culminating in 
a powerful religious-political split in 1906 in Oraibi that led to the birth 
of three distinctive villages—Bacabi, Hotevilla, and New Oraibi.

In 1931 the Hopi people of New Oraibi decided to adopt a consti
tution and bylaws for their community. Those documents are reprinted 
here. According to Felix Cohen, a charter was also established in the 
villages of Mis-hong-na-va and Shu-pau-la-va that was approved by 
the Department of Interior on March 31, 1933. I have been unable to 
locate a copy of that document.

The constitution of the Hopi Council of New Oraibi was presented 
before the senate subcommittee of the Committee on Indian Affairs dur
ing the congressional hearing that was held at Oraibi on May 18, 1931. 
Otto Lomavitu, who identified himself as the president of the Hopi 
Council of New Oraibi, testified that this organization had been formed 
and the constitution had been drafted by a number of “educated” Hopi in 
Oraibi in an effort to create an organization that could more effectively 
represent their people’s needs. Lomavitu said a broader attempt at inter
village political cooperation—an entity called the Federation of Hopi 
Indians—had been tried a few years earlier, but he indicated that this had 
failed “through lack of cooperation on the part of the other people.”

This document, written by a small segment of the Hopi people, 
indicates the deep sense of political and cultural division that was evi
dent in Hopi country. This rift would only intensify during the next sev
eral decades. For example, the Hopi tribal council and government were 
formally organized in 1935 upon adoption of the IRA. In a majority vote 
in 1936, the Hopi tribe officially adopted a constitution, although dis
sension was immediately apparent, and several villages refused to rec
ognize the newly organized tribal council. They asserted that the Hopi 
tribal council “was regarded by a majority of Hopis as a rubber-stamp 
organization for the Indian Bureau superintendent” (Spicer 1967, 206).

James, Harry C. Pages from Hopi History (Tucson: University of Arizona 
Press, 1974).

Sturtevant, William C., ed. Handbook of North American Indians. 
Vol. 9, Southwest, vol. ed. Alfonso Ortiz (Washington, D.C.: Smithsonian 
Institution, 1979).

U.S. Senate. Survey of Conditions of the Indians in the United States. 
Hearings before a Subcommittee of the Committee of Indian Affairs. 71st 
Cong., 3d sess., pt. 18 (Washington, D.C.:GPO, 1932):9409-10.

Constitution

I.  Name:The name of this organization shall be the Hopi Council of New Oraibi.
II.  Officers: Its offi cers shall consist of president, vice president, secretary, 
treasurer, and sergeant at arms.

III.  Advisory:Its advisory board shall consist of four members, men of mature 
mind and who possess sufficient education as to readily understand transac
tions of different kinds.
IV.  Membership: Its membership shall be open to all men and boys of the 
Hopi Tribe of Indians.

V.  Object and Purpose:The object and purpose of this organization shall be—

(a)  To hold the tribe in a bond of peace through mutual understanding and 

cooperation.

(b)  To further progress in education, better living, sanitation, and all that 

goes to make up better civilization.

(c)  To act as medium for better understanding between the United States 
Government, the officials who labor amongst us, and the Hopi Tribe 
through cooperation for the up building of our people.

(d)  To defend our individual and tribal rights against encroachment as citi
zens of the United States, howbeit welcoming any aid which may be 
given our tribe free from graft.

(e)  To be the channel through which governmental announcements and 

transactions shall be made in things pertaining to the Hopi Tribe.

VI.  Religion: In things religious, this organization shall be neutral. It is the 
intention of the organization to cooperate with our Indian chiefs and elders 
in so far as they seek the welfare of our Hopi people, keeping in view that we 
are approaching a new era in Indian life, sponsored by the Government, with a 
view of finally absorbing the tribe into its full citizenry, and for the purpose the 
Government has placed its employees among us.

By-Laws

I.  The Hopi Council of New Oraibi shall meet once every other month unless 
special occasion demands [an]extra session, and at such places as shall be 
agreed upon by the members.
II.  The officers shall be elected by vote of the members, and shall hold office for 
two years, which term may be prolonged according to ability and efficiency.

III.  It shall be the duty of the president and vice president to preside at all ses
sions, the vice president to preside in the absence of the president.
IV.  The president shall have the power to examine the accounts of his subordi
nate officers and shall have access to all important communications, written or 
oral, which shall be in the possession of the members of this organization.

V.  It shall be the duty of the secretary to take the minutes of the meetings, the 
names and addresses of the members, and to notify the members of the next 
session.
VI.  It shall be the duty of the treasurer to file all money receipts and expenses 
and which he shall report to the members from time to time.

VII.  It shall be the duty of the sergeant at arms to keep order during the ses
sion, and to call upon and urge delinquent members to be present at all the 
meetings of the organization.
VIII.  The members of the advisory board shall be elected by vote and shall 
hold office for life, or until such time as they are not able.

IX.  The membership fee shall be 25 cents per year, which shall be used in pay
ment for light, writing materials, and other expenses.
X.  It shall be the duty of all members of this organization to keep the president 
informed at all times of all important movements among the Indians.

XI.  It shall be the duty of all members of this organization to contribute toward 
an emergency fund and the purchasing of fuel.

A copy of the Constitution and By-Laws of this organization shall be sent 
to the office of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for file, to the agency office 
at Keams Canyon, Ariz., for record, and for each member shall be furnished 
with a copy of same.

The foregoing articles shall be subject to the revision and further amend

ments as time and circumstances may require.

