Constitution and By-laws of 

the Hopi Tribe

Approved December 19, 1936 
and as Amended on 
August 1, 1969 
February 14, 1980 
December 7, 1993

United States 
Department of the Interior 
Office of Indian Affairs
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 This Constitution, to be known as the Constitution and By-Laws of the Hopi Tribe, is adopt

ed by the self-governing Hopi and Tewa Villages of Arizona to provide a way of working togeth

er for peace and agreement between the villages, and of preserving the good things of Hopi life, 

and to provide a way of organizing to deal with modem problems, with the United States 

Government and with the outside world generally.
 
 

ARTICLE I - JURISDICTION

 
 The authority of the Tribe under this Constitution shall cover the Hopi villages and such land 

as shall be determined by the Hopi Tribal Council in agreement with the United States 

Government and the Navajo Tribe, and such lands as may be added thereto in future. The Hopi 

Tribal Council is hereby authorized to negotiate with the proper officials to reach such agree

ment, and to accept it by a majority vote.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. The following persons shall be enrolled members of the Hopi Tribe:

All persons whose names appear on the Census Roll of the Hopi Tribe as of December 31, 

1937, as corrected and adopted by the Hopi Tribal Council; PROVIDED, That subsequent cor

rections may be made to said roll by the Hopi Tribal Council at any time with the approval of 

the Secretary of Interior.

SECTION 2.  After the effective date of this Constitution, the following persons shall be eligi

ble for enrolled membership in the Hopi Tribe.

(a)  All persons of a one-fourth (1/4) degree Hopi Indian blood or more, or one-fourth (1/4) 

degree Tewa Indian blood or more, or one-fourth (1/4) degree Hopi-Tewa Indian blood or more 

combined, bom after December 31, 1937, who are not enrolled with any other Indian Tribe.

(b)  For the purpose of determining enrolled membership, Hopi Indian blood, Tewa Indian 

blood, and Hopi - Tewa Indian blood shall mean biological lineal descent from any Hopi or Tewa 

Indian person whose name appears on the Corrected Membership Roll of the Hopi Tribe as 

defined in SECTION 1.

SECTION 3.  Persons Already Enrolled. All persons properly enrolled as members of the Hopi 

Tribe as of the effective date of this Constitution shall continue to be members.

SECTION 4. Village Membership. Village membership shall be determined by the individual 

Hopi Villages.

SECTION 5. Hopi Enrollment Ordinance. The Hopi Tribal Council shall adopt, and from time 
to time may amend, an enrollment ordinance not inconsistent with this ARTICLE, setting forth 
the manner in which this ARTICLE shall be implemented and administered.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - ORGANIZATION

 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribe is a union of self-governing villages sharing common interests 

and working for the common welfare of all. It consists of the following recognized villages:

First Mesa (consolidated villages of Walpi, Shitchumovi, and Tewa).

Mishongnovi.

Sipaulavi.

Shungopavi.

Oraibi.

Kyakotsmovi.

Bakabi. 

Hotevilla.

Moenkopi.

SECTION 2. The following powers which the Tribe now has under existing law or which have 
been given by the Act of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), and acts amendatory thereof or supple
mental thereto, are reserved to the individual villages:

(a)  To appoint guardians for orphan children and incompetent members.

(b)  To adjust family disputes and regulate family relations of members of the villages.

(c)  To regulate the inheritance of property of the members of the villages.

(d)  To assign farming land, subject to the provisions of ARTICLE VII.

SECTION 3. Each village shall decide for itself how it shall be organized. Until a village shall 
decide to organize in another manner, it shall be considered as being under the traditional Hopi 
organization, and the Kikmongwi of such village shall be recognized as Its leader.

SECTION 4. Airy village which does not possess the traditional Hopi self-government, or 
which wishes to make a change in that government or add something to it, may adopt a Village 
Constitution in the following manner: A Constitution, consistent with this Constitution and

By-Laws, shall be drawn up, and made known to all the voting members of such village, and a 
copy shall be given to the Superintendent of the Hopi jurisdiction. Upon the request of the 
Kikmongwi of such village, or of 25% of the voting members thereof, for an election on such 

Constitution, the Superintendent shall make sure that all members have had ample opportunity 
to study the proposed Constitution. He shall then call a special meeting of the voting members 

of such village, for the purpose of voting on the adoption of the proposed Constitution, and shall 
see that there is a fair vote. If at such referendum, not less than half of the voting members of the 

village cast their votes, and if a majority of those voting accepts the proposed Constitution, it 
shall then become the Constitution of that village, and only officials chosen according to its pro

visions shall be recognized.

The village Constitution shall clearly say how the Council representatives and other village 
officials shall be chosen, as well as the official who shall perform the duties placed upon the 
Kikmongwi in this Constitution. Such village Constitution may be amended or abolished in the 
same manner as provided for its adoption.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall consist of a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and repre
sentatives from the various villages. The number of representatives from each village shall be 
determined accordingly to its population, as follows: villages of 50 to 250 population, one (1) rep
resentative; villages of 251 to 500 population, two (2) representatives; villages of 501 to 750 pop
ulation, three (3) representatives; villages of over 750 population, four (4) representatives.

The representation in the first Tribal Council shall be as follows;

First Mesa ....................................................................................4

Mishongnovi.............................................................................. 2

Sipaulavi...................................................................................... 1

Shungopavi................................................................................ 2

Oraibi..............................................................................................1

Kyakotsmovi.............................................................................. 2

Bakabi 

................................................ 1

Hotevilla ...................................................................................... 2

Moenkopi ................................................................................... 2
 
 

 
 
 SECTION 2. The term of office of the representatives shall be two (2) years, except that at the 

first election or choosing of representatives following the adoption of this section, approximate
ly one-half of the representatives shall serve for a term of one (1) year. The determination as to 
which representatives shall serve for one (1) year shall be made by the Tribal Council and 
announced to each village Kikmongwi or Governor on or before the first day of October 1969. 

Representatives may serve any number of terms in succession or otherwise.

SECTION 3. Each representative must be a member of the village which he represents. He 
must be twenty-five (25) years or more of age, and must have lived in the Hopi jurisdiction for 
not less than two (2) years before talcing office, and must be able to speak the Hopi language 
fluently.

SECTION 4. Each village shall decide for itself how it shall choose its representatives, subject 
to the provisions of SECTION 5. Representatives shall be recognized by the Council only if they 
are certified by the Kikmongwi of their respective villages. Certifications may be made in writ
ing or in person.

SECTION 5. One (1) representative of the Village of Moenkopi shall be selected from the 
Lower District, and certified by the Kikimongwi of Moenkopi, and one (1) representative shall 
be selected by the Upper district, and certified by the Official whom that District may appoint, 
or who may be specified in a village Constitution adopted under the provisions of ARTICLE III, 
SECTION 4. This section may be repealed, with the consent of the Tribal Council, by vote of a 
two-thirds majority at a meeting of the voting members of Moenkopi Village called and held 
subject to the provisions of ARTICLE III, SECTION 4.

SECTION 6. No business shall be done unless at least a majority of the members are present.

SECTION 7. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected by secret ballot by all mem
bers of the Hopi Tribe. The Tribal Council shall choose from its own members or from other 
members of the Tribe, a secretary, treasurer, sergeant-at-arms and interpreters and such other 
officers and committees as it may determine necessary, subject to the provisions of the By-Laws, 
ARTICLE I.

SECTION 8. All members of the Hopi Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or over shall be quali
fied to vote in any election or referendum other than village elections and referendums under 
such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Hopi Tribal Council.

SECTION 9. The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve for a term of four (4) years. 
Candidates for the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be members of the Hopi Tribe, 
twenty-five (25) years of age or older and must be able to speak the Hopi language fluently. Each 
candidate for either of said offices must also have lived on the Hopi Reservation for not less than 

two years immediately preceding his announcement of such candidacy.

SECTION 10. Candidates for the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman may declare their 
candidacy by filing with the Tribal Secretary or Tribal Chairman or Vice Chairman a petition 
signed by at least ten (10) adult members of the tribe at least 15 days before the date set for the 

election. It shall be the duty of the Secretary to post the names of the qualified candidates for 

both the primary and final elections in a public place in each village at least ten (10) days prior 

to the election,

SECTION 11. A primary election shall be held on the first Wednesday in November in 1969 
and on the first Wednesday in November in every fourth year thereafter, PROVIDED. That, no 
primary election shall be held in the years when there shall be no more than two (2) candidates 
for either of the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman. The two (2) candidates in a primary 
election receiving the highest number of votes for each of said offices of Chairman and Vice 

Chairman shall have their names entered in the final election. In the event there are not more 
than two (2) candidates for either of such offices those candidates with no more than one (1) com
peting candidate shall have their names entered in the final election without the necessity of a 

primary election.

SECTION 12. The general election shall be held on the third Wednesday in November 1969 

and on the third Wednesday in every fourth year thereafter,

SECTION 13. Inauguration of the Chairman and Vice Chairman shall take place at the first 

regular Tribal Council meeting following their election.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE
 
 SECTION 1. Any Chairman, Vice Chairman, representative or other officer found guilty In a 
tribal or other court of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, of a felony, or of drunkenness, shall 
be automatically removed from office and the Council shall refuse to recognize him.

SECTION 2, Any officer or representative may be removed from office for serious neglect of 
duty, by a vote of not less than two-thirds of the Council, after the officer to be so removed has 
been given full opportunity to hear the charges against him and to defend himself before the 
Council,

SECTION 3. Vacancies occurring for any reason among the representatives shall be filled for 
the rest of the term by the village concerned, in the same manner as a representative from that 
village is ordinarily chosen.

Vacancies occurring for any reason among the officers appointed by the Council shall be filled 

by the Council.

Vacancies occurring for any reason in the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman or in the 

office of any other officer shall be filled for the rest of the term in the same manner as those offi

cers are ordinarily chosen.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL
 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall have the following powers which the Tribe now 

has under existing law or which have been given to the Tribe by the Act of June 18, 1934. The 

Tribal Council shall exercise these powers subject to the terms of this Constitution and to the 

Constitution and Statutes of the United States.

(a)  To represent and speak for the Hopi Tribe in all matters for the welfare of the Tribe, and to 

negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, and with the councils or governments 
of other tribes.

(b) To employ lawyers, the choice of lawyers and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of 

the Secretary of the Interior so long as required by Federal laws.

(c)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, or other tribal prop

erty. 

'

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior and other governmental agencies upon all 

appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Tribe, before the submission of 

such estimates to the Office of Management and Budget or to Congress.

(e)  To raise and take care of a Tribal Council fund by accepting grants or gifts from any per

son, State, or the United States Government, or by charging persons doing business within the 

Reservation reasonable license fees.

(f)  To use such Tribal Council fund for the welfare of the Tribe, and for salaries or authorized 

expenses of tribal officers. All payments from the Tribal Council fund shall be a matter of public 

record at all times.

(g) To make ordinances to protect the peace and welfare of the Tribe, and to set up courts for

  the settlement of claims and disputes, and for the trial and punishment of Indians within the 

jurisdiction charged with offenses against such ordinances.

(h) To act as a court to hear and settle claims or disputes between villages in the manner 

provided in ARTICLE VIII.

(i)  To provide by ordinance for removal or exclusion from the jurisdiction of any non

members whose presence may be harmful to the members of the Tribe.

(j)  To regulate the activities of voluntary cooperative associations of members of the Tribe 

for business purposes.
 
 

 
 
 (k)  To protect the arts, crafts, traditions, and ceremonies of the Hopi Indians.

(l)  To delegate any of the powers of the Council to committees or officers, keeping the 

right to review any action taken.

(m)  To request a charter of incorporation to be issued as provided in the Act of June 18, 

1934.

(n)  To adopt resolutions providing the way in which the Tribal Council itself shall do its 

business.

SECTION 2. Any resolution or ordinance which, by the terms of this Constitution, is sub

ject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be given to the Superintendent of the 

jurisdiction, who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon 

become effective, but the Superintendent shall send a copy of the same, bearing his endorse

ment, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of 

enactment, veto said ordinance or resolution for any reason by notifying the Tribal Council 

of his decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or resolution submitted to 

him, within ten (10) days after enactment, he shall report his reasons to the Tribal Council. 

If the Tribal Council thinks these reasons are not sufficient, it may, by a majority vote, refer 

the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days 

from the date of its enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance 

or resolution shall become effective.

SECTION 3. The Hopi Tribal Council may exercise such further powers as may in the 

future be delegated to it by the members of the Tribe or by the Secretary of the Interior, or 
any other duly authorized official or agency of the State or Federal Government.

SECTION 4. Any rights and powers which the Hopi Tribe of Indians now has, but which are 

not expressly mentioned in this Constitution, shall not be lost or limited by this ARTICLE, but 

may be exercised by the members of the Hopi Tribe of Indians through the adoption of appro

priate by-laws and constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - LAND

 
 SECTION 1. Assignment of use of farming land within the traditional clan holdings of the 

Villages of First Mesa, Mishongnovi, Sipaulavi, and Shungopavi, and within the established 

village holdings of the Villages of Kyakotsmovi, Bakabi, Oraibi, Hotevilla, and Moenkopi, as in 

effect at the time of approval of this Constitution, shall be made by each village according to its 

established custom, or such rules as it may lay down under a village Constitution adopted accord

ing to the provisions of ARTICLE III, SECTION 4. Unoccupied land beyond the clan and village 

holdings mentioned shall be open to the use of any member of the Tribe, under the supervision

of the Tribal Council. Nothing in this ARTICLE shall permit depriving a member of the Tribe of 

farming land actually occupied and beneficially used by him at the time of approval of this 

Constitution, but where an individual is occupying or using land which belongs to another by 

agreement with the owner, that land shall continue to belong to that owner.

SECTION 2. In order to improve and preserve the range, range land shall be supervised by the 

Tribal Council in cooperation with the various United States Government agencies.

SECTION 3. All springs shall be considered the property of the Tribe, and no individual or 

group of individuals shall be allowed to prevent the reasonable use of any spring by members 

of the Tribe generally, but the individual who develops a spring, or on whose land it is, shall have 

the first use of it.

SECTION 4. The administration of this ARTICLE shall be subject to the provisions of SECTION 6 

of the Act of June 18, 1934.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - DISPUTES BETWEEN VILLAGES
 
 SECTION 1. When a dispute arises between villages over any matter, the Kikmongwi of any 

village party to the dispute may inform the Chairman of the Tribal Council of the nature of the 

dispute, and ask him to call a special meeting of the Council to settle the matter.

The Chairman shall thereupon call a special meeting of the Council, to be held on the eighth 

day from the day of such request, at which meeting he, and the Council representatives or other 

persons chosen by each village party to the dispute to speak for it before the Council, may sum

mon all witnesses having evidence to give in the matter, and may examine them.

When the Council has heard all the evidence and examined the witnesses to its satisfaction, it 

shall hold a secret meeting which shall not be attended by the representatives of the villages 

party to the dispute, and after full and careful consideration and discussion, shall vote on a deci

sion. Such decision shall become effective when it is carried by a majority of the Council mem

bers present. The Council shall keep a record of the evidence and the reasons for its decision.

SECTION 2. If both the Chairman and the Vice Chairman are representatives of villages party 

to the dispute, the Council shall elect a temporary Chairman to serve for the duration of the trial.

SECTION 3. If any village party to the dispute feels that the decision of the Council in such 

case is unjust, the Kikmongwi of that village may notify the Superintendent within ten (10) days 

and the decision of the Council shall then be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 

within ninety (90) days thereafter, in the manner provided in ARTICLE VI, SECTION 2.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1.  All resident members of the Tribe shall be given equal opportunities to share in 

the economic resources and activities of the jurisdiction.

SECTION 2. All members of the Tribe shall be free to worship in their own way, to speak and 

write their opinion, and to meet together.
 
 

ARTICLE X - AMENDMENT

 
 Any representative may propose an amendment to this Constitution and By-Laws at any 

meeting of the Council. Such proposed amendment may be discussed at that meeting, but no 

vote shall be taken on it until the next following meeting of the Council. If the Council shall then 

approve such proposed amendment by a majority vote, it shall request the Secretary of the 

Interior to call a referendum for accepting or rejecting such amendment. It shall then be the duty 

of the Secretary of the Interior to call such referendum, at which the proposed amendment may 

be adopted subject to the Secretary's approval in the same manner as provided for the adoption 

and approval of this Constitution and By-Laws.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - TAXATION

 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall, subject to the express limitations contained in this 

Constitution and the laws of the United States, have the power to impose duties, fees, taxes, and 

assessments on any person, corporation or association residing or doing business within the 

Hopi Reservation, PROVIDED, That the Tribal Council shall not have the power to impose a per

sonal income tax.

SECTION 2. No tax imposed by the Tribal Council under SECTION 1 of this ARTICLE shall 

become effective unless approved by a majority vote of the eligible voters of the Hopi Tribe vot

ing in a referendum called for that purpose pursuant to SECTION 8 of ARTICLE IV of this 

Constitution.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE HOPI TRIBE

ARTICLE I - DUTIES AND QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS

 
 SECTION 1. The Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the Tribal Council. He shall per
form all duties of a Chairman fairly and impartially, and exercise any authority delegated to him 

by the Council.

He shall vote only in case of a tie.

SECTION 2. The Vice Chairman shall help the Chairman in his duties when called upon to do 
so, and in the absence of the Chairman shall act as Chairman with all the attendant powers and 
duties.

SECTION 3, The representatives shall perform the duties of the Council, set forth in this 
Constitution and By-Laws. They shall inform the people of their villages of the matters discussed 
and the actions taken, and they shall fairly and truly represent the people of their villages.

SECTION 4. The Secretary shall write all tribal correspondence, as authorized by the Council, 
and shall keep an accurate record of all action of regular and special meetings of the Council. He 
shall keep a copy of such records in good order and available to the general public and shall send 
another copy of them, following each meeting of the Council, to the Superintendent of the juris
diction. He shall have a vote in the Council only if he is a regular representative.

The Secretary must be a resident member of the Hopi Tribe, and must be able to speak the 

Hopi language fluently, and to read and write English well.

SECTION 5. The Treasurer shall receive, receipt for, and take care of all funds in the custody 
of the Council, and deposit them in a bank or elsewhere as directed by the Council. He shall 
make payments therefrom only when authorized by a resolution of the Council, and in the man
ner authorized. He shall keep a faithful record of such funds, and shall report fully on receipts, 
payments, and amounts in hand at all regular meetings of the Council and whenever requested 
to do so by the Council. His accounts shall be open to public inspection.

He shall have a vote in the Council only if he is a regular representative.

The Treasurer may be required by the Council to give a bond satisfactory to the Council and 

to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs,

The Treasurer must be a resident member of the Hopi Tribe, and must be able to speak the 

Hopi language fluently and to read and write English well.

SECTION 6. The interpreter or interpreters shall be resident members of the Hopi Tribe, and 

shall be able to interpret fluently and accurately in the Hopi, English; and Navajo languages, and 

shall do so whenever requested by the Council. Interpreters shall have a vote in the Council only 

when they are regular representatives.

SECTION 7. The Sergeant-At-Arms, at the orders of the Chairman, shall enforce order in the 

Council, and shall summon all persons required to appear before the Council, and deliver 

notices of special meetings, and perform such other duties as may be required of him by the 

Council. The Sergeant-at-Arms shall be a resident member of the Hopi Tribe, and must be able 

to speak Hopi fluently, and to speak English.

SECTION 8. The qualifications and duties of all committees and officers appointed by the 

Council shall be clearly defined by resolution of the Tribal Council at the time the positions are 

created. Such committees or officers shall report to the Council whenever required.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held on the first day of December, 

March, June, and September, at such places as shall be determined by the Council.

SECTION 2. Within sixteen (16) days after this Constitution goes into effect, the villages shall 

choose their representatives for the first term of one (1) year, and on the sixteenth day the first 

meeting of the Council shall be held at Oraibi Day School.

SECTION 3. Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Chairman in his discretion 

or at the request of four (4) representatives, or in the case of a dispute between villages, as pro

vided in ARTICLE VIII of the Constitution. Notice of special meetings shall be delivered to each 

representative not less than eight (8) days before such meeting, together with a statement of the 

business to be discussed thereat.

SECTION 4. All members of the Hopi Tribe may attend any meeting of the Council, but they 

may not speak, except by invitation of the Council. Non-members may be invited by the Council 

to attend any meeting and to address it.

SECTION 5. The Council may employ, or may request the Superintendent of the jurisdiction 

to furnish, a clerk trained in shorthand , to take down verbatim minutes of any meeting.

SECTION 6. When the Council desires advise of, or consultation with, any officer of the 

Federal Government, it may invite him to attend any meeting and may give him the privilege of 

the floor.
 
 

ARTICLE III - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS

 
 All ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded and available at all times for the information 

and education of the Tribe. Copies of all ordinances shall be posted from time to time in a pub

lic place in each village.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - EAGLE HUNTING TERRITORIES AND SHRINES

 
 The Tribal Council shall negotiate with the United States Government agencies concerned, 

and with other tribes and other persons concerned, in order to secure protection of the right of 

the Hopi Tribe to hunt for eagles in its traditional territories, and to secure protection of the right 

of the Hopi Tribe to hunt for eagles in its traditional territories, and to secure adequate protec

tion for its outlying, established shrines.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ALL-PUEBLO COUNCIL

 
 The Tribal Council may appoint delegates to speak for the Tribe at the All-Pueblo Council, and 

to report to the Council and the Tribe on all proceedings thereof.
 
 

ARTICLE VI  - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

 
 This Constitution and By-Laws, when ratified by a majority vote of the adult members of 

the Hopi Tribe voting at a referendum called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 

PROVIDED, That at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote at such ref

erendum, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and if approved, shall take effect 

from the date of approval.

Pursuant to an order, approved September 30, 1936, by the Secretary of the Interior, the 

attached Constitution and By-laws was submitted for ratification to the Hopi Tribe residing on 

the Hopi Reservation, and was on October 24, 1936, duly adopted by a vote of 651 for, and 104 

against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in 

accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

George Coochise, Chairman of Election Board.

Albert Yava, Secretary of Election Board.

A. G. Hutton, Superintendent.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the 

authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 

the attached Constitution and By-Laws of the Hopi Tribe.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior Department or by the Office 

of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said 

Constitution and By-Laws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered to abide by the provisions 

of the said Constitution and By-Laws.

Approval recommended December 14, 1936.

John Collier, Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Harold L. Ickes, Secretary of the Interior. [Seal] 

Washington, D.C., December 19,1936
 
  
  
  
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
HOPI TRIBE 
ARIZONA

 
 AUG - I 1969  
 

AMENDMENT I


Section 3 of Article II, Membership, shall be deleted la its entirety.

The first sentence of Article IV, The Tribal Council, shall be 
amended to read:

Section 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall consist of 
a chairtian, vice chairman and representatives from the 
various villages.

Section 2 of Article IV, The Tribal Council, shall be amended in its 
entirety to read as follows:

Sec. 2. The tern of office of the representatives 
shall be two years, except that at the first election 
or choosing of representatives following the adoption 
of this section, approximately one-half of the 
representatives shall serve for a tern of one year. 
The determination as to which representatives shall 
serve for one year shall be made by the tribal council 
and announced to each village Kickmongwi or Governor 
on or before the first day of October 1969. Repre
sentatives may serve any number of terns in succession 
or otherwise.

Section 7 of Article IV, The Tribal Council, shall be amended to read 
as follows:

Sec. 1. The chairman and vice chairman shall be elected 
by secret ballot by all members of the Hopi Tribe. The 
tribal council shall choose from its own members or from 
other members of the tribe, a secretary, treasurer, 
sergeant-at-arms and interpreters and such other 
officers and committees as it may determine neces
sary, subject to the provisions of the Bylaws, 
Article I.

Article IV, The Tribal Council, flhall be amended by adding to it 
Sections 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 as follows:

Sec. 8. AH members of the Hopi Tribe twenty-one years 
of age or over shall be qualified to vote in any elec
tion or referendum, other than village elections and 
referendums under such rules and regulations as may 
be prescribed by the Hopi Tribal Council and approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 9. The chairman and vice chairman shall each serve 
for a term of four years. Candidates for the offices 
of chairman and vice chairman shall be members of the 
Hopi Tribe, twenty-five years of age or older and must 
be able to speak the Hopi language fluently. Each 
candidate for either of said offices must also have 
lived on the Hopi Reservation for not less than two 
years immediately preceding his announcement of such 
candidacy.

Sec. 10. Candidates for the offices of chairman and 
vice chairman say declare their candidacy by filing 
with the tribal secretary or tribal chairman or vice 
chairman a petition signed by at least ten adult 
members of the tribe at least 15 days before the date 
set for the election. It shall be the duty of the secre
tary to post the names of the qualified candidates for 
both the primary and final elections in a public place 
in each village at least ten days prior to the election.

See. 11. A primary election shall be held on the first 
Wednesday in November in 1969 and on the first Wednesday 
in November in every fourth year thereafter, provided 
that, no primary election shall be held in the years 
when there shall be no more than two candidates for - 
either of the offices of chairman and vice chairman.

The two candidates in a primary election receiving the 
highest number of votes for each of said offices of 
chairman and vice chairman shall have their names 
entered in the final election. In the event there 
are not more than two candidates for either of such 
offices those candidates with no more than one 
competing candidate shall have their canes entered 
in the final election without the necessity of a 
primary election.

Sec. 12. The general election shall be held on the 
third Wednesday in November 1969 and on the third 
Wednesday in November in every fourth year thereafter.

Sec. 13. Inauguration of the chairman and vice chairman 
shall take place at the first regular tribal council 
meeting following their election.
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
HOPI TRIBE 
ARIZONA

AMENDMENT II

 
 Article V, Vacancies and Removal from Office, shall be amended as 
follows:

Section 1. Any chairman, vice chairman, representative 
or other officer found guilty in a tribal or other court 
of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, of a felony, or 
of drunkenness, shall be automatically removed from 
office, and the council shall refuse to recognize him.

Section. 3, paragraph 3 shall be added as follows:

Vacancies occurring for any reason in the offices 
of chairman and vice chairman or in the office 
of any other officer shall be filled for the rest 
of the term in the same manner as those officers 
are ordinarily chosen.

Harrison Loesch,
 
 

I,

APPROVAL

 
 Assistant

Secretary of the

Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority 

granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, 

do hereby approve the attached Amendments I and II to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.

Approval Recomended:

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Assistant Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C.

Date: AUG - 1 1969
 
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE

HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

 
 Amendment III

Article II, Membership, Section 1, subsections 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) shall 
be amended as follows:

Section 1. Membership in the Hopi Tribe shall be as follows:

(a) All persons whose names appear on the census roll of the Hopi 
Tribe as of December 31, 1937, provided that corrections may be made 
at any time to said roll by the Tribal Council, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b) All children born after December 31, 1937, whose father and 
mother are both members of the Hopi Tribe.

(c) All children bom after December 31, 1937, whose mother is 
a member of the Hopi Tribe, and whose father is a member of some 
other tribe.

Article II, Section 1, subsection 1(d) is not being amended.
 
 

CERTIFICATES OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Phoenix Area Office

on June 26, 1979, the attached Amendment III to 

the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe, was submitted 

to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona and was

on January 30, 1980, duly adopted by a vote of

607 for and 74 against, in an election in which at 

least 30 per cent of the 977 entitled to vote cast their 

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization

Act of June 13, 1934, (48 Stat. 984) as amended by the Act of

June 15, 1934, (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 Amendment No. III

I, Curtis Geiogomah, Deputy Phoenix Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 

by virtue of the authority delegated to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and redelegated to me, 

do hereby approve the foregoing Amendment No. Ill to the Constitution and 

Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona; provided that nothing in. this approval 

shall be construed as authorizing any action under the Constitution and Bylaws 

that would be contrary to Federal Law.

Phoenix, Arizona

Date: 

FEB 14 1980
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

 
 AMENDMENT NO. A

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP shall be amended in its entirety to read as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The following persons shall be enrolled members of the Hopi Tribe.

All persons whose names appear on the Census Roll of the Hopi Tribe as of 
December 31, 1937, as corrected and adopted by the Hopi Tribal Council; 
PROVIDED, That subsequent corrections may be made to said roll by the Hopi 
Tribal Council at any time with the approval of the Secretary of the interior.

Section 2. After the effective date of this amendment, the following persons shall 
be eligible for enrolled membership in the Hopi Tribe.

(a)  All persons of one-fourth (1/4) degree Hopi Indian blood or more, or 
one-fourth (1/4) degree Tewa Indian blood or more, or one-fourth (1/4) 
degree Hopi-Tewa Indian blood or more combined, born after December 31, 
1937, who are not enrolled with any other Indian Tribe.

(b)  For the purpose of determining enrolled membership, Hopi Indian blood, 
Tewa Indian blood, and Hopi-Tewa Indian blood shall mean biological lineal 
descent from any Hopi or Tewa Indian person whose name appears on the 
Corrected Membership Roll of the Hopi Tribe as defined in Section 1.

Section 3.  Persons Already Enrolled. All persons properly enrolled as members 
of the Hopi Tribe as of the effective date of this amendment shall continue to be 
members.

Section 4.  Village Membership. Village membership shall be determined by the 
individual Hopi Villages.

Section 5.  Hopi Enrollment Ordinance. The Hopi Tribal Council shall adopt, 
and from time to time may amend, an enrollment ordinance not inconsistent with 
this Article, setting forth the manner in which this Article shall be implemented 
and administered.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment A 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. IV to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment No. A to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona 
was submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly
adopted/reiected by a vote of 364 for, and 134 against, and 9 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the
members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

776 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D. M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment A, hereinafter known as Amendment No. IV, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date:
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT B

 
 Section 8 of ARTICLE IV - THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to read as follows:

Section 8. All members of the Hopi Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or over shall 
be qualified to vote in any election or referendum other than village elections and 
referendums under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Hopi 
Tribal Council.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment B 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. V to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment B to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly
adopted/reiected by a vote of 343 for, and 154 against, and 0 cast
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the
774 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment B, hereinafter known as Amendment No. V, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada E. Deer

Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date
 
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT C

 
 Section 1(e) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 
eliminate Secretarial approval to read as follows:

(e) To raise and take care of a tribal council fund by accepting grants or gifts 
from any person, State, or the United States Government, or by charging 
persons doing business within the Reservation reasonable license fees.

Having been duly adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment C 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. VI to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment C to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly 
adopted/rejected by a vote of 325 for, and 169 against, and 0 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat, 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/1993
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment C, hereinafter known as Amendment No. VI, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: DEC 13 1993
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT D

 
 Section 1(g) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 
eliminate Secretarial approval to read as follows:

(g) To make ordinances to protect the peace and welfare of the Tribe, and to set 
up courts for the settlement of claims and disputes, and for the trial and 
punishment of Indians within the jurisdiction charged with offenses against 
such ordinances.

Having been duly adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment D 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. VII to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment D to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7. 1993, duly
adopted/rejected by a vote of 311 for, and 178 against, and 0 cast

ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D. M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment D, hereinafter known as Amendment No. VII, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: DEC 30 1993
 
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT E

 
 Section 1 (i) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 
eliminate Secretarial approval to read as follows:

(i)  To provide by ordinance for removal or exclusion from the jurisdiction of 
any non-members whose presence may be harmful to the members of the 
Tribe.

Having been duly adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment E 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. VIII to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment E to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly 
adopted/rejected by a vote of 329 for, and 162 against, and 0 cast
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I,  Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment E, hereinafter known as Amendment No. VIII, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

CiflG 

i

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: DEC 30 1993
 
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT F

 
 Section 1(b) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 
read as follows:

(b) To employ lawyers, the choice of lawyers and fixing of fees to be subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior so long as required by 
Federal law.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment F 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. IX to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment F to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly
adopted/rejected by a vote of 344 for, and 144 against, and 0 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment F, hereinafter known as Amendment No. IX, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: DEC 30 1993
 
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT G

 
 The Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe shall be amended by adding a new article entitled 
ARTICLE XI - TAXATION to read as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE XI - TAXATION

 
 Section 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall, subject to the express limitations 
contained in this Constitution and the laws of the United States, have the power 
to impose duties, fees, taxes, and assessments on any person, corporation or 
association residing or doing business within the Hopi Reservation, PROVIDED, 
That the Tribal Council shall not have the power to impose a personal income tax.

Section 2. No tax imposed by the Tribal Council under Section I of this Article 
shall become effective unless approved by a majority vote of the eligible voters 
of the Hopi Tribe voting in a referendum called for that purpose pursuant to 
Section 8 of Article IV of this Constitution.

Having been duly adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment G 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. X to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment G to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to tire qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly
adopted/rejected by a vote of 278 for, and 213 against, and 0
cast
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 1, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D. M 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment G, hereinafter known as Amendment No. X, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

C_.L- > < l C < i c 1
Ada E, Deer 
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs
 
 

,

 
 Washington, D. C.

Date: DEC 30 1993

