Constitution Reform

View Comparisons between the current Constitution and the draft reformed Constitution of 
the Hopi Tribe

The Constitutional Reform Committee (CRC), established by the Hopi Tribal Council, has 
achieved many milestones over the last two years. The CRC was established to review the 
existing Constitution, conduct public hearings and develop proposed revisions to the Hopi 
Tribal Constitution and By-Laws. The CRC held their first meeting on March 10, 2001 with 
two representatives from each Hopi village.

The Constitution Reform Committee continues to seek the input and comments from the 
public on the "draft" Hopi Constitution and has held meetings at the Moencopi Community 
Center, Hotevilla Village Office, Tewa Village Office, Kykotsmovi Community Center, 
Bacavi Village Office, Shungopavy Community Center, Keams Canyon Boarding School, 
Kootka Hall and Phoenix Indian Medical Center to date. The Constitution Reform Committee 
thanks all those who have attended their meetings and for providing their valuable comments 
and input.

The Committee encourages all Hopi sinom to contribute and welcomes your attendance at 
their meetings. Regular Committee meetings are held on the third Tuesday of each month at 
the Hopi Cultural Center. Public comments and suggestion may be directed to: Constitution 
Reform Committee, P. O. Box 123, Kykotsmovi, AZ 86039. Requests for more information 
or questions may also be directed to the Tribal Operations Program at (928) 734-3161 or 
(928) 738-2222.

DRAFT: March 12, 2002

Constitution of the Hopi Tribe
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 The Constitution is adopted by the self-governing Hopi and Tewa Villages to provide a way 
of working together for peace and agreement between Villages and of preserving the good 
things of Hopi life.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. Territory. The Territory of the Tribe shall include all lands held by the Tribe or the 
People, or by the United States for the benefit of the Tribe or the People, and any additional 
lands acquired by the Tribe or by the United States for the benefit of the Tribe or the People. 
The Territory shall include all water, air, surface, subsurface, natural resources, and any 
interests therein, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent or right-of-way in fee or 
otherwise, by the governments of the United States or the Tribe, existing or in the future.

Section 2. Jurisdiction. The Jurisdiction of the Tribe shall extend to all persons, activities, and 
property within the Territory based upon inherent territorial or popular sovereignty. Every 
public highway or any other ingress into the Territory shall be accompanied by a public notice

that entry is conditioned upon the acceptance of the Jurisdiction of the Tribe. Any person who 
enters the Territory shall, by entering, be deemed to have consented to the Jurisdiction of the 
Tribe. Every license or permit issued under the authority of the Tribe shall include a provision 
submitting all parties and their assigns to the Jurisdiction of the Tribe. Any employee of the 
Tribe shall, by accepting employment, be deemed to have submitted to the Jurisdiction of the 
Tribe. The Council shall have the power to assert the Sovereignty and Jurisdiction of the 
Tribe by law over all matters that affect the interests of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Membership Requirements. The following persons shall be enrolled members of
the Tribe:

(a)  . All persons whose names appear on the Census Roll of the Hopi Tribe as of December 31, 
1937, as corrected by the Council;

(b)  . All persons of a one-fourth degree Hopi Indian blood or more, or one-fourth degree Tewa 
Indian blood or more, or one-fourth degree Hopi-Tewa Indian blood or more combined, bom 
after December 31, 1937, who are not enrolled with any other Indian Tribe;

(c)  . For the purpose of determining membership, Hopi Indian blood, Tewa Indian blood, and 
Hopi-Tewa Indian blood shall mean biological lineal descent from any Hopi or Tewa Indian 
person whose name appears on the Corrected Membership Roll of the Hopi Tribe as defined 
in Section 1(a).
 
 

ARTICLE III - ORGANIZATION OF THE GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. Branches of Government. The government of the Tribe shall be comprised of four 
branches: Villages, Legislative, Executive, and Judicial.

Section 2. Separation of Functions. No branch of government shall exercise the powers or 
functions delegated to another branch.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH

 
 Section 1. Composition. The Legislative Branch shall be comprised of a Council. The Council 
shall consist of two Representatives from each Village. The Council shall select a 
Representative from among its Members to serve as Speaker of the Council.

Section 2. Terms. Each Representative shall serve a two year term or until a successor has 
been sworn into office. Representatives may serve any number of terms in succession or 
otherwise.

Section 3. Qualifications. Each Representative shall be a member of the Village which he or 
she represents and a Member of the Tribe, at least twenty-five years old, a resident of any 
lands within the Jurisdiction of the Tribe for at least two years immediately prior to the 
election or appointment, be able to speak the Hopi language, and shall meet other criteria, if 
any, set by the respective Village.

Section 4. Powers.

(a)  . Legislative power shall be vested in the Council. The Council shall have the power to 
make laws.

(b)  . The Council shall enact an annual budget by law which shall include an appropriation for 
die Judicial Branch and the Executive Branch. Every funding item in the annual budget must 
have been previously authorized by law. No moneys shall be drawn from the Treasury except 
by a warrant signed by the President and except upon authorization and appropriation by law.

(c)  . The Council shall adopt a public legislative process. Legislative proposals shall be 
formally introduced as written Bills, read into the legislative Record, published in a 
Legislative Calendar for at least thirty days prior to a vote by the Council, and made the 
subject of a legislative hearing during such period. A Bill shall remain on the Legislative 
Calendar for no more than one hundred eighty days. All votes of the Council shall be cast in 
public and shall be published in a tally with the name and vote of each Representative 
recorded. All Bills passed by the Council shall be presented to the President for signature or 
veto. Any action by the Council which does not follow the legislative process shall be deemed 
void. All Bills shall include a statement identifying the specific law, if any, to be superseded, 
repealed, or amended. All laws shall be compiled into a Code which shall be published 
annually.

(d)  . The Council shall have the power to override a veto by the President by an affirmative 
vote of at least two-thirds of the entire Council.

(e)  . The Council shall have the power to confirm or deny nominees selected by the President 
as Directors within the Executive Branch. Representatives shall not be permitted to serve as 
Directors within the Executive Branch.

(f)  . The Council shall have the power to create Regulatory Commissions by law. Any 
Commission created by the Council shall be in the Executive Branch of government. No 
Member of the Council may also be a member of any Commission created by the Council. All 
Commissions shall be subject to the laws of the Tribe. Any Commission created by the 
Council shall have the authority to promulgate written regulations pursuant to law and due 
process. Members of all Commissions shall be selected by nomination by the President, 
subject to confirmation by the Council.

(g)  . The Council shall have the power to create Executive Boards by law. Any Board created 
by the Council shall be in the Executive Branch of government and shall be subject to the 
powers of the Executive Branch. No Member of the Council may also be a member of any 
Board created by the Council. All Boards shall be subject to the laws of the Tribe. Members 
of all Boards shall be selected by election as required by law, or by nomination by the 
President, subject to confirmation of the Council.

(h)  . The Council shall have the power to establish policies and procedures, and appoint 
officials, for the Council including the power to establish legislative committees comprised 
exclusively of Representatives.
 
 

ARTICLE V - EXECUTIVE BRANCH

 
 Section 1. Composition. The Executive Branch shall be comprised of an elected President and 
Vice President and all Departments that the Council deems necessary by law for the effective 
operation of Government. The Department shall include at a minimum a Department of

Treasury.

Section 2. Terms. The President and Vice President shall each serve a four year term or until a 
successor has been sworn into office. The President and Vice President shall seek office as a 
single political ticket for the same term of office. The Vice President shall be subordinate to 
the President. The President and Vice President may serve any number of terms in succession 
or otherwise.

Section 3. Qualifications. A President and Vice President shall each be a Member of the 
Tribe, at least twenty-five years old, be able to speak the Hopi language, and must be a 
resident of any lands within the Jurisdiction of the Tribe for at least two years immediately 
prior to the election.

Section 4. Powers.

 Executive power shall be vested in the President. The President shall have the power to 

(a).
execute, administer, and enforce the laws.

 The President shall have the power to veto a Bill passed by the Council with a written 
(b).
explanation of any objections, and if the President takes no action within twelve calendar days 
from the date the Bill is presented to the President, then the Bill shall become law.

 The President may authorize the transfer and expenditure of monies which are included in 
(c).
the budget approved by the Council. No moneys shall be drawn from the Treasury except by a 
warrant signed by the President.

 The President shall have the power to nominate an Executive Director for each 

(d).
Department subject to confirmation by the Council. Any nominee that is neither confirmed 
nor denied within sixty days of nomination shall be considered confirmed. The President shall 
have the power to remove an Executive Director of a Department.

 The President shall have the power to represent the Tribe in all matters with any other 
(e).
government, entity, or individual. The President shall not negotiate any treaty, compact, or 
contract which has not been generally authorized by law. Any treaty or compact negotiated by 
the President shall be subject to ratification of the Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - JUDICIAL BRANCH

 
 Section 1. Composition. The Judicial Branch shall be comprised of a Trial Court and a Court 
of Appeals. The Trial Court shall be comprised of one Chief Judge and other Associate 
Judges as necessary. The Court of Appeals shall be comprised of one Chief Justice and two 
Associate Justices.

Section 2. Terms. Trial Court Judges shall serve two year terms of office or until their 
successors have been sworn into office. Court of Appeals Justices shall serve six year terms of 
office or until their successors have been sworn into office. Judges and Justices may serve any 
number of terms in succession or otherwise.

Section 3. Qualifications.

(a). The Chief Justice of the Court of Appeals shall possess a law degree. One Associate

Justice of the Court of Appeals shall be a member of the Hopi Tribe, shall be able to speak the 
Hopi language, and shall possess a college degree, and one other Associate Justice of the 
Court of Appeals shall be a member of the Hopi Tribe and shall possess a college degree.

(b). The Chief Judge of the Trial Court shall possess a law degree. At least one Associate 
Judge of the Trial Court shall be a member of the Hopi Tribe and shall be able to speak the 
Hopi language.

Section 4. Appointment. There shall be a Judicial Nominating Committee comprised of one 
representative selected by each Village. All Judges and Justices shall be appointed upon 
nomination of the Judicial Nominating Committee, approval by the President, and 
confirmation by the Council.

Section 5. Jurisdiction.

 The Trial Court shall have original jurisdiction over all cases and controversies, both 
(a).
criminal and civil, in law or in equity, arising under the Constitution, laws, customs, and 
traditions of the Tribe, including cases in which the Tribe or its officials and employees shall 
be a party. Any such case or controversy arising within the jurisdiction of the Tribe shall be 
filed in the Trial Court before it is filed in any other court. This grant of jurisdiction shall not 
be construed to be a waiver of the Sovereign Immunity of the Tribe.

 The Court of Appeals shall have appellate jurisdiction over any case on appeal from the 
(b).
Trial Court. The Court of Appeals shall have exclusive jurisdiction over all election disputes 
and over disputes between Villages.

Section 6. Powers and Duties.

 The Trial Court shall have the power to make findings of fact and conclusions of law. The 

(a).
Trial Court shall have the power to issue all remedies in law and in equity.

 The Trial Court shall have the power to declare the laws of the Tribe void if such laws are 

(b).
not in agreement with this Constitution.

 The Court of Appeals shall have the power to interpret the Constitution and laws of the 

(c).
Tribe and to make conclusions of law. Any decision of the Court of Appeals shall be final.

 The Court of Appeals shall have the power to declare the laws of the Tribe void if such 

(d).
laws are not in agreement with this Constitution.

(e).

 All orders, opinions, and decisions of the Court of Appeals shall be written and published.

(f).

 The Courts shall render a final disposition in all cases properly filed.

 The Judicial Branch shall have the power to administer binds appropriated by law for the 

(g).
Judicial Branch.

Section 7. Right to Appeal. Any party to a civil action, or a defendant in a criminal action, 
who is dissatisfied with the judgment or verdict may appeal to the Court of Appeals. All 
appeals that are accepted for review by the Court of Appeals shall be heard by the full court.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VILLAGES

 
 Section 1. Villages. The recognized Villages of the Tribe are:

 Bacabi
 Hotevilla
 Kykotsmovi
 Lower Moencopi
 Mishongnovi
 Oraibi
 Sichomovi
 Shungopavy
 Sipaulavi
 Tewa
 Upper Moencopi

(a).
(b).
(c).
(d).
(e).
(f).
(g).
(h).
(i).
(j).
(k).
(l).  Walpi

Section 2. Powers.

(a).

 The following powers are reserved exclusively to the Villages:

(1).

 To appoint guardians for children and incompetent members.

 To adjust family disputes and regulate family relations of members of the Villages or 

(2).
persons residing within a Village.

(3).

 To determine Village Membership subject to Article VII, Section 3(b).

(b).

 The following powers are reserved exclusively to the Villages or Clans:

(1).

 To regulate the inheritance of property within the control of a Village or Clan.

(2).

 To govern all Village Lands or Clan Lands.

 Except as provided in Article VII, Section 4, any disputes involving powers reserved to 

(c).
the Villages or Clans shall be decided by the Village or Clan unless the Village or Clan 
permits the matter to be decided by the Judicial Branch, and any such decision by the Judicial 
Branch shall be final.

Section 3. Village Organization.

 Each Village shall decide for itself how it shall be organized including the selection of its 

(a).
Council Representatives.

 A Village may call a referendum by written petition signed by at least twenty-five percent 

(b).
of the Members of the Village to decide how the Village shall be organized. Enrolled 
Members of the Tribe age eighteen and older shall be entitled to sign a petition in their 
respective Village based on their Village affiliation number maintained by the Tribe as 
reported to the Tribe by each Village. A Member of the Tribe shall have no more than one 
Village affiliation number. Upon request, the Election Board shall issue a referendum petition 
to a Petitioner along with the minimum number of signatures required for a valid petition. A

Petitioner shall have sixty days to collect the requisite number of signatures. A Petitioner shall 
submit a completed referendum petition to the Election Board. The Election Board shall 
verify the signatures on a petition within thirty days of receipt of the petition. Upon receipt of 
a valid petition, the Election Board shall call and hold a referendum election within sixty 
days. A referendum election shall be decided by majority vote provided that at least fifty 
percent of the eligible voters vote in the election. A referendum approved by the voters of a 
Village shall serve as the official organization of the Village which shall be recognized by the 
Council until modified by a subsequent referendum election of the voters of the Village.

Section 4. Disputes Between Villages. All disputes between Villages shall be mediated by a 
neutral third party agreeable to the respective Villages or, if the Villages cannot agree on a 
mediator then the Judicial Nominating Committee shall select a neutral third party as the 
mediator. The final result of the mediation may be appealed to the Court of Appeals. 
Decisions by the Court of Appeals shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - REMOVAL AND VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Removal of the President and Vice President. The Council shall have the sole 
power to remove the President or Vice President for gross misconduct by a two-thirds 
majority vote of the Council; provided, that Villages which do not send Representatives to the 
Council shall not be counted for purposes of achieving a two-thirds majority vote. The 
Council shall provide the President or Vice President with notice of the charges and an 
opportunity to address the Council in a public hearing. A President or Vice President who is 
removed from office must wait at least two full terms before becoming eligible to run for 
elective office.

Section 2. Removal of Council Representatives. Each Village shall have the power to remove 
its Representative according to the criteria and procedures established by the Village.

Section 3. Removal of Judges and Justices. The Judicial Nominating Committee shall have 
the sole power to remove a Judge or Justice for gross misconduct by a two-thirds vote of the 
entire Judicial Nominating Committee. The Judicial Nominating Committee shall provide the 
Judge or Justice with notice of the charges and an opportunity to address the Judicial 
Nominating Committee in a public hearing.

Section 4. Automatic Removal. A President, Vice President, Representative, Judge, Justice, 
Executive Director, or a Legislative Branch official or employee who is convicted in any 
court of a felony, or any crime involving embezzlement, dishonesty, or fraud shall be 
automatically removed from office or employment. A person who is appealing a conviction 
shall be suspended without pay pending the outcome of the final appeal. Any person who is 
removed under this Section shall not be eligible to run for office, serve as an elected official, 
or serve as an employee of the Tribe in the future.

Section 5. Vacancy in the Office of the President. A vacancy in the office of President shall be 
filled by the Vice President who shall serve as President for the unexpired term, and who shall 
appoint a new Vice President.

Section 6. Vacancy in the Office of the Vice President. The President shall appoint a qualified 
person to fill a vacancy in the office of the Vice President.

Section 7. Vacancy in the Office of the President and Vice President. A vacancy in both the

office of the President and the Office of the Vice President shall be filled as follows:

 If less than one year remains in the terms, then the Speaker of the Council shall serve as 

(a).
President for the unexpired term;

 If more than one year remains in the terms, then a Special Election shall be held within 

(b).
ninety days of the vacancies to fill the vacant seats.

Section 8. Vacancies in the Council. A vacancy in a Representative seat shall be filled by the 
respective Village.

Section 9. Vacancies in the Judicial Branch. A vacancy in an Office of Judge or Justice shall 
be filled upon nomination of the Judicial Nominating Committee, approval by the President, 
and confirmation by the Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. The government of the Tribe including the Villages shall not:

(a). make or enforce any law which infringes upon religious beliefs or prohibits the free 
exercise thereof;

 make or enforce any law prohibiting the freedom of speech, press, expression, 

(b).
conscience, association, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble, and to petition the 
government for political purposes;

 violate the right of the people to be secure in the privacy of their persons, houses, papers, 
(c).
vehicles, and effects against unreasonable searches and seizures, nor issue warrants but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation signed by a Judge, and particularly 
describing the place, person, house, papers, vehicle, or effects to be searched, the object and 
scope of such search, and the person or thing to be seized, and to have these rights explained 
at the time of arrest, and any search or seizure taken in violation of this provision shall be 
excluded;

 subject any person to be prosecuted twice for the same offense arising out of the same 

(d).
incident;

(e).

 compel any person under oath in any case to self incrimination;

 take any private property or possessory interest in private property, or deprive the owner 

(f).
of value by regulation of any private property, for public use without due process and just 
compensation;

 deny to any person in a criminal or civil proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial 
(g).
which shall be initiated no more than six months from the filing of criminal charges or a civil 
complaint, and in a criminal proceeding to be informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation, to be presumed innocent until proven guilty, to be confronted with the witnesses 
against him or her, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his or her favor, and 
to have the assistance of counsel for his or her defense; nor deprive any person of liberty or 
properly without due process of law;

(h)  . require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, or inflict cruel or unusual methods of 
interrogation or punishment;

(i)  . deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection, application, or opportunity 
of the laws including but not limited to age, gender, sexual orientation, religion, or 
nationality;

(j) . pass any bill of attainder or a law which punishes conduct after the fact;

(k)  . deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment of the right, upon 
request, to a trial by a jury of their peers of not less than six persons;

(1)  . deny to any person the right to own and use firearms subject to regulation by the Tribe;

(m)  . deny to any person the access to his or her own personal information maintained by the 
Tribe, or public information which shall include but not be limited to financial records 
maintained by the Tribe.

Section 2. Retained Powers. Powers not granted to the government shall be reserved to the 
People.
 
 

ARTICLE X - REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Referendum Requirements. The enrolled Members of the Tribe retain the right to 
reverse any action of the Council by binding Referendum. Enrolled Members of the Tribe 
shall be required to obtain the signatures of at least twenty five percent of the eligible voters 
of the Tribe on a written Referendum petition. The Election Board shall formally issue to the 
Petitioners the minimum number of signatures required for a valid Referendum petition. Upon 
request, the Election Board shall furnish a list of the eligible voters and their addresses to the 
Members collecting Referendum petition signatures. The Members shall have ninety days to 
collect the requisite number of signatures on the Referendum petition. A Referendum petition 
shall address one subject or item which may be either a Bill which has been formally 
introduced and published in the Legislative Calendar or an enacted law. Members of the Tribe 
shall submit a Referendum petition to the Election Board which shall have thirty calendar 
days to rule on the validity of the signatures on the petition, and if valid, the Election Board 
shall submit the matter to a popular Referendum in a Special Election which shall be held 
within forty-five days. The decision by a majority vote of the voters in the Special Election 
shall determine the success or failure of the Referendum, and if successful, the decision shall 
be binding upon the Tribe until amended or revoked by a subsequent Referendum vote in a 
Special Election.

Section 2. Council Referendum. The Council shall have the power to call a Referendum under 
this Article by a two-thirds majority vote.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Primary Election. A Primary Election for President and Vice President shall be 
held on the first Wednesday in October.

Section 2. General Election. A General Election for President and Vice President shall be 
held on the third Wednesday in November.

Section 3. Election Board. There shall be an Election Board to conduct all elections in 
accordance with the election laws. The Election Board shall provide notice of all elections.

(a)  . The Election Board shall be comprised of twelve persons with one member selected by 
each Village.

(b)  . Each Election Board Member shall serve four years or until a successor is sworn into 
office. Election Board Members may serve any number of terms in succession or otherwise.

Section 4. Nominations. Each candidate for President and Vice President shall file a petition 
with the Election Board. Each petition shall contain at least ten signatures of Members of the 
Tribe who are qualified to vote.

Section 5. Voters. Any Member of the Tribe age eighteen or older shall be eligible to vote in 
an election other than a Village election. Eligibility to vote in a Village election shall be 
determined by the Village.

Section 6. Ballots. All elections shall be conducted using secret written ballots.

Section 7. Absentee Ballots. Voting by Absentee Ballot shall be permitted in all elections.

Section 8. Polling Places. A polling place shall be located in each Village. The Council may 
by law establish additional polling places.

Se  ction 9. Certification of Election Results. The Election Board shall tally the votes at each
election and certify the results.

Section 10. Challenges to Election Results. Any challenges to the election results shall be 
filed with the Court of Appeals within three days of certification of the results by the Election 
Board. The Court of Appeals shall hear and decide all election challenges within thirty days. 
The decision of the Court of Appeals shall be final.

Section 11. Oath of Office. The Election Board shall administer the Oath of Office to newly 
elected or appointed Representatives on the first Wednesday in January. The Election Board 
shall administer the Oath of Office to a newly elected President and Vice President on the first 
Wednesday in January. All Representatives, the President, and the Vice President shall swear 
an oath and allegiance to the Hopi Tribe and the Hopi Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - LANDS AND PROPERTY

 
 Section 1. Village Lands. The Villages of Kykotsmovi, Bacabi, Oraibi, Hotevilla, Upper 
Moencopi, and Lower Moencopi shall have the power to exclusively govern its Village Lands 
and establish procedures for the assignment, use, and alienation of Village Lands. At the 
request of the Village, the Council shall have the power by law to issue patents to property 
interests in Village Lands only to Members of the Tribe.

Section 2. Clan Lands. Traditional Clan Land holdings of the Villages of Tewa, Walpi, 

 Mishongnovi, Sipaulavi, Shungopavy, and Sichomovi shall be exclusively governed by their 
respective clans. At the request of the Clan, the Council shall have the power by law to issue 
patents to property interests in Clan Lands only to Members of the Tribe.
 
 

 
 
 Section 3. Other Lands. Lands other than Village Lands or Clan Lands shall be governed by 
the Council by law. The Council shall have the power by law to issue patents to property 
interests in Other Lands only to Members of the Tribe.

Section 4. Transfer of Other Lands. Notwithstanding any other provision of the Constitution, 
interests in real property within the Territory shall not be conveyed or otherwise transferred, 
by sale, gift, devise, descent, forfeiture, or otherwise, to any person who is not a Member, and 
any such conveyance or transfer shall be deemed void and any action to execute such a 
conveyance or transfer, if intentional, shall constitute a crime as determined by law for 
persons who are subject to the jurisdiction of the Tribe, and any property subjected to such 
conveyance or transfer determined to be criminal shall escheat to the Tribe.

Section 5. Land Disputes. Notwithstanding Article VI, Section 5, and except as provided in 
Article VII, Section 4, the Judicial Branch shall not have jurisdiction over disputes regarding 
Village Lands or Clan Land unless the Village(s) or Clan(s) involved in the dispute submit 
such dispute to the Judicial Branch, and the decision of the Judicial Branch shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

 
 Section 1. Sovereign Immunity. The Tribe shall possess inherent Sovereign Immunity. The 
Legislative Branch and the Judicial Branch shall be immune from suit in any jurisdiction and 
such immunity shall not be waived. The Legislative Branch shall have the power to waive by 
law the Sovereign Immunity of executive officials, employees, or departments in accordance 
with the Constitution.

Section 2. Immunity from Suit by Foreign Parties. The government of the Tribe, its 
subdivisions, and officials and employees acting within the scope of their duties shall be 
immune from suit brought by any foreign entity, government, or person, except to the extent 
that the Council expressly waives immunity by law. Nothing in this Constitution shall be 
deemed to waive Sovereign Immunity from foreign suit.

Section 3. Immunity from Suit by Domestic Parties. The government of the Tribe shall be 
immune from suit brought by any public or private entity or individual within the Territory or 
subject to the Jurisdiction of the Tribe except to the extent that the Council expressly waives 
such Sovereign Immunity by law. Executive Branch officials and employees acting within the 
scope of their duties shall be immune from suit, except to the extent that the Council expressly 
waives by law such Sovereign Immunity, or to the extent necessary to enforce in equity 
exclusively in the Judicial Branch the rights and responsibilities arising under this 
Constitution. Persons exercising any power reserved to the Villages who are acting within the 
scope of such power shall be immune from suit except to the extent necessary to enforce in 
equity exclusively in the Judicial Branch the rights and responsibilities arising under this 
Constitution.

constitution reform

Page 12 of 12

http://www.hopi.nsn.us/Pages/Govemment/cnstutn%20rfm.htm

7/12/02

