Constitution and By-laws of

the Hopi Tribe

Approved December 19, 1936 
and as Amended on
August 1, 1969
February 14, 1980 
December 7, 1993 
May 25, 2017
 
 

HOPI CLANS

 
 Tobacco -Pipwungwa 
Rabbit -Tapwungwa 
Roadrunner -Hospo’wungwa 
Sun -Taawawungwa 
Parrot -Kyarwungwa 
Sand -Tuwawungwa 
Rattlesnake -Tsu' wungwa 
Lizard -Kuukutswungwa 
Butterfly -Poovolwungwa 
Cloud -Oomawwungwa 
Snow -Nuvawungwa 
Fog -Pamoswungwa 
Badger -Honanwungwa 
Maasaw -Maswungwa 
Fire -Kookopwungwa 
Bamboo -Paaqapwungwa 
Spider -Kookyangwungwa 
Greasewood -Tepwungwa 
Corn - Qa’owungwa
Tsaakwayna - Tsa’kwaywungwa 
Raven - Angwuswungwa 
Rabbit Brush - Sivapwungwa

Coyote -Iswungwa
Water Coyote -Paaiswungwa 
Eagle -Kwaawungwa
Tansy Mustard -Aaswungwa 
Grey Hawk -Masikwaywungwa 
Sparrow Hawk -Kyelwungwa 
Kachina -Katsinwungwa 
Bluebird -Torswungwa 
Squash -Paatangwungwa 
Crane -Atokwungwa 
Sunforehead -Qalwungwa 
Water -Patkiwungwa 
Bear -Honwungwa 
Bear Strap -Piqoswungwa 
Young Corn -Piikyaswungwa 
Flute -Lenwungwa
Deer -Alwungwa
Bow -Aawatwungwa
Grey Badger - Masihonanwungwa 
Grey Bear - Masihonwungwa 
Greasy Eye Socket - Wi’ivoswungw; 
Arrow - Hoowungwa

United States

Department of the Interior 

- Office of Indian Affairs
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 This Constitution, to be known as the Constitution and By-Laws of the Hopi Tribe, is adopted by the self- 

governing Hopi and Tewa Villages of Arizona to provide a way of working together for peace and 
agreement between the villages, and of preserving the good things of Hopi life, and to provide a way of 
organizing to deal with modem problems, with the United States Government and with the outside world 
generally.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - JURISDICTION

 
 The authority of the Tribe under this Constitution shall cover the Hopi villages and such land as shall be 

determined by the Hopi Tribal Council in agreement with the United States Government and the Navajo 
Tribe, and such lands as may be added thereto in future. The Hopi Tribal Council is hereby authorized to 
negotiate with the proper officials to reach such agreement, and to accept it by a majority vote.

SECTION 1.  The following persons shall be enrolled members of the Hopi Tribe:
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 All persons whose names appear on the Census Roll of the Hopi Tribe as of December 31,1937, as 

corrected and adopted by the Hopi Tribal Council; PROVIDED, that subsequent corrections may be made to 
said roll by the Hopi Tribal Council at any time with the approval of the Secretary of Interior.

SECTION 2.  After the effective date of this Constitution, the following persons shall be eligible for 

enrolled membership in the Hopi Tribe.

(a)  All persons of a one-fourth (1/4) degree Hopi Indian blood or more, or one-fourth (1/4) degree Tewa 

Indian blood or more, or one-fourth (1/4) degree Hopi-Tewa Indian blood or more combined, bom after 
December 31,1937, who are not enrolled with any other Indian Tribe.

(b)  For the purpose of determining enrolled membership, Hopi Indian blood, Tewa Indian blood, and 
Hopi - Tewa Indian blood shall mean biological lineal descent from any Hopi or Tewa Indian person whose 
name appears on the Corrected Membership Roll of the Hopi Tribe as defined in Section 1.

SECTION 3.  Persons Already Enrolled. All persons properly enrolled as members of the Hopi Tribe as of 

the effective date of this Constitution shall continue to be members.

SECTION 4.  Village Membership. Village membership shall be determined by the individual 

Hopi Villages.

SECTION 5. Hopi Enrollment Ordinance. The Hopi Tribal Council shall adopt, and from time to 

time may amend, an enrollment ordinance not inconsistent with this Article, setting forth the 
manner in which this Article shall be implemented and administered.
 
 

ARTICLE III - ORGANIZATION

 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribe is a union of self-governing villages sharing common interests and 

working for the common welfare of all. It consists of the following recognized villages:

First Mesa (consolidated villages of Walpi, Shitchumovi, and Tewa).

Mishongnovi.

Sipaulavi.

Shungopavi.

Oraibi.

Kyakotsmovi.

Bakabi.

Hotevilla.

Moenkopi.

SECTION 2. The following powers which the Tribe now has under existing law or which have 
been given by the Act of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), and acts amendatory thereof or supplemental 
thereto, are reserved to the individual villages:

(a)  To appoint guardians for orphan children and incompetent members.

(b)  To adjust family disputes and regulate family relations of members of the villages.

(c)  To regulate the inheritance of property of the members of the villages.

(d)  To assign farming land, subject to the provisions of Article VII.

SECTION 3. Each village shall decide for itself how it shall be organized. Until a village shall 

decide to organize in another manner, it shall be considered as being under the traditional Hopi 
organization, and the Kikmongwi of such village shall be recognized as its leader.

SECTION 4. Any village which does not possess the traditional Hopi self-government, or which 

wishes to make a change in that government or add something to it, may adopt a Village 
Constitution in the following manner: A Constitution, consistent with this Constitution and

By-Laws, shall be drawn up, and made known to all the voting members of such village, and a copy shall be 
given to the Superintendent of the Hopi jurisdiction. Upon the request of the Kikmongwi of such village, or 
of 25% of the voting members thereof, for an election on such Constitution, the Superintendent shall make 
sure that all members have had ample opportunity to study the proposed Constitution. He shall then call a 
special meeting of the voting members of such village, for the purpose of voting on the adoption of the 
proposed Constitution, and shall see that there is a fair vote. If at such referendum, not less than half of the 
voting members of the village cast their votes, and if a majority of those voting accepts the proposed 
Constitution, it shall then become the Constipation of that village, and only officials chosen according to its 
provisions shall be recognized.

The village Constitution shall clearly say how the Council representatives and other village officials shall 

be chosen, as well as the official who shall perform the duties placed upon the Kikmongwi in this 
Constitution. Such village Constitution may be amended or abolished in the same manner as provided for its 
adoption.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall consist of a Chairman, Vice Chairman, and representatives 
from the various villages. The number of representatives from each village shall be determined accordingly 
to its population, as follows: villages of 50 to 250 population, one (1) representative; villages of 251 to 500 
population, two (2) representatives; villages of 501 to 750 population, three (3) representatives; villages of 
over 750 population, four (4) representatives.

The representation in the first Tribal Council shall be as follows:

First Mesa............................................................... 4

Mishongnovi.........................................................2

Sipaulavi........................................................ 1

Shungopavi............................................................ 2

Oraibi........................................................................1

Kyakotsmovi.........................................................2

Bakabi..................................................................... 1

Hotevilla..................................................................2

Moenkopi...............................................................-2

SECTION 2. The term of office of the representatives shall be two (2) years, except that at the first 

election or choosing of representatives following the adoption of this section, approximately one-half of the 
representatives shall serve for a term of one (1) year. The determination as to which representatives shall 
serve for one (1) year shall be made by the Tribal Council and announced to each village Kikmongwi or 
Governor on or before the first day of October 1969. Representatives may serve any number of terms in 
succession or otherwise.

SECTION 3. Each representative must be a member of the village which he represents. He must be 
twenty-five (25) years or more of age, and must have lived in the Hopi jurisdiction for not less than two 
(2) years before taking office, and must be able to speak the Hopi language fluently.

SECTION 4. Each village shall decide for itself how it shall choose its representatives, subject to the 
provisions of Section 5. Representatives shall be recognized by the Council only if they are certified by 
the Kikmongwi of their respective villages. Certifications may be made in writing or in person.

SECTION 5. One (1) representative of the Village of Moenkopi shall be selected from the Lower 
District, and certified by the Kikimongwi of Moenkopi, and one (1) representative shall be selected by 
the Upper district, and certified by the Official whom that District may appoint, or who may be specified 
in a village Constitution adopted under the provisions of Article III, Section 4. This section may be 
repealed, with the consent of the Tribal Council, by vote of a two-thirds majority at a meeting of the 
voting members of Moenkopi Village called and held subject to the provisions of Article III, Section 4.

SECTION 6. No business shall be done unless at least a majority of the members are present.

SECTION 7. The Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected by secret ballot by all members of the 
Hopi Tribe. The Tribal Council shall choose from its own members or from other members of the Tribe, a 
secretary, treasurer, sergeant-at-arms and interpreters and such other officers and committees as it may 
determine necessary subject to the provisions of the By-Laws, Article I.

SECTION 8. All members of the Hopi Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or over shall be qualified to 

vote in any election or referendum other than village elections and referendums under such rules and 
regulations as may be prescribed by the Hopi Tribal Council.

SECTION 9. The Chairman and Vice Chairman shall serve for a term of four (4) years. Candidates for 

the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman shall be members of the Hopi Tribe, twenty-five years of 
age or older and must speak the Hopi language. Each candidate for either of said offices must also have a 
primary and physical residency on the Hopi Reservation for not less than two years immediately 
preceding his announcement of such candidacy. A candidate must not have been convicted of a felony or 
any crime involving moral turpitude within ten (10) years of candidacy.

SECTION 10. Candidates for the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman shall declare their 

candidacy with the Hopi Election Board. Candidacy procedures will be made available through the Hopi 
Election Board and will follow Hopi Election Board Ordinances #34 of the Hopi Tribe.

SECTION 11. A primary election shall be held on the second Thursday in September 2017 and on the 
second Thursday in September every fourth year thereafter. PROVIDED. That, no primary election shall 
be held in the years when there shall be no more than two (2) candidates for either of the offices of 
Chairman and Vice Chairman. The two (2) candidates in a primary election receiving the highest 
number of votes for each of said offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman shall have their names entered 
in the final election. In the event there are not more than two (2) candidates for either of such offices 
those candidates with no more than one (1) competing candidate shall have their names entered in the 
final election without the necessity of a primary election.

SECTION 12. The final election shall be held on the second Thursday in November 2017 and on the second 

Thursday in every fourth year thereafter.

SECTION 13. Inauguration of the Chairman and Vice Chairman shall take place at the first regular 

Tribal Council meeting following their election.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 SECTION 1. Any Chairman, Vice Chairman, representative or other officer found guilty in a tribal or 

other court of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, of a felony, or of drunkenness, shall be 
automatically removed from office and the Council shall refuse to recognize him.

SECTION 2. Any officer or representative may be removed from office for serious neglect of duty, by 

a vote of not less than two-thirds of the Council, after the officer to be so removed has been given full 
opportunity to hear the charges against him and to defend himself before the Council.

SECTION 3. Vacancies occurring for any reason in the offices of the chairman and vice chairman or 

in the office of any other officer shall be filled for the rest of the term in the same manner as those 
officers are ordinarily chosen through a Special Election to fill the vacancies of the Chairman Vice 
chairman or both following the Special Election process as stated in the Hopi Election Ordinance #34.

Vacancies occurring for any reason among the officers appointed by the Council shall be filled by the 

Council.

Vacancies occurring for any reason in the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman or in the offices of any 

officer shall be filled for the rest of the term in the same manner as those officers are ordinarily chosen.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall have the following powers which the Tribe now has under 
existing law or which have been given to the Tribe by the Act of June 18, 1934. The Tribal Council shall 
exercise these powers subject to the terms of this Constitution and to the Constitution and Statutes of the 
United States.

(a)  To represent and speak for the Hopi Tribe in all matters for the welfare of the Tribe, and to negotiate 

with the Federal, State, and local governments, and with the councils or governments of other tribes.

(b) To employ lawyers, the choice of lawyers and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary 

of the Interior so long as required by Federal law.

(c)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, or other tribal property.

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior and other governmental agencies upon all appropriation 

estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Tribe, before the submission of such estimates to the 
Office of Management and Budget or to Congress.

(e) To raise and take care of a tribal council fund by accepting grants or gifts from any person, State, or 

the United States Government, or by charging persons doing business within the Reservation reasonable 
license fees.

(f) To use such Tribal Council fund for the welfare of the Tribe, and for salaries or authorized expenses 
of tribal officers. All payments from the Tribal Council fund shall be a matter of public record at all times.

(g)  To make ordinances to protect the peace and welfare of the Tribe, and to set up courts for the 
settlement of claims and disputes, and for the trial and punishment of Indians within the jurisdiction 
charged with offenses against such ordinances.

(h)  To act as a court to hear and settle claims or disputes between villages in the manner provided in 

Article VIII.

(i) 

To provide by ordinance for removal or exclusion from the jurisdiction of any non-members whose 

presence may be harmful to the members of the Tribe.

(j) To regulate the activities of voluntary cooperative associations of members of the Tribe for business 

purposes.

(k) To protect the arts, crafts, traditions, and ceremonies of the Hopi Indians.

(1)  To delegate any of the powers of the Council to committees or officers, keeping the right to review 

any action taken.

(m) To request a charter of incorporation to be issued as provided in the Act of June 18,1934.

(n)  To adopt resolutions providing the way in which the Tribal Council itself shall do its business.

SECTION 2. Any resolution or ordinance which, by the terms of this Constitution, is subject to review 

by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be given to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction, who shall, 
within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become effective, 
but the Superintendent shall send a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of enactment, veto said ordinance or resolution 
for any reason by notifying the Tribal Council of his decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or resolution submitted to him, within 

ten (10) days after enactment, he shall report his reasons to the Tribal Council. If the Tribal Council 
thinks these reasons are not sufficient, it may,by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to 
the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of its enactment, approve 
the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

SECTION 3. The Hopi Tribal Council may exercise such further powers as may in the future be 

delegated to it by the members of the Tribe or by the Secretary of the Interior, or any other duly 
authorized official or agency of the State or Federal Government.

SECTION 4. Any rights and powers which the Hopi Tribe of Indians now has, but which are not 

expressly mentioned in this Constitution, shall not be lost or limited by this Article, but may be 
exercised by the members of the Hopi Tribe of Indians through the adoption of appropriate by-laws and 
constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - LAND

 
 SECTION 1. Assignment of use of farming land within the traditional clan holdings of the Villages 
of First Mesa, Mishongnovi, Sipaulavi, and Shungopavi, and within the established village holdings of 
the Villages of Kyakotsmovi, Bakabi, Oraibi, Hotevilla, and Moenkopi, as in effect at the time of 
approval of this Constitution, shall be made by each village according to its established custom, or such 
rules as it may lay down under a village Constitution adopted according to the provisions of Article III, 
Section 4. Unoccupied land beyond the clan and village holdings mentioned shall be open to the use of 
any member of the Tribe, under the supervision of the Tribal Council.

Nothing in this Article shall permit depriving a member of the Tribe of farming land actually occupied and 
beneficially used by him at the time of approval of this Constitution, but where an individual is occupying or 
using land which belongs to another by agreement with the owner, that land shall continue to belong to that 
owner.

SECTION 2. In order to improve and preserve the range, range land shall be supervised by the Tribal 

Council in cooperation with the various United States Government agencies.

SECTION 3; All springs shall be considered the property of the Tribe, and no individual or group of 
individuals shall be allowed to prevent the reasonable use of any spring by members of the Tribe generally, 
but the individual who develops a spring, or on whose land it is, shall have the first use of it.

SECTION 4. The administration of this Article shall be subject to the provisions of Section 6 of the Act of 

June 18,1934.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII DISPUTES BETWEEN VILLAGES

 
 SECTION 1. When a dispute arises between villages over any matter, the Kikmongwi of any village party 
to the dispute may inform the Chairman of the Tribal Council of the nature of the dispute, and ask him to call 
a special meeting of the Council to settle the matter.

The Chairman shall thereupon call a special meeting of the Council, to be held on the eighth day from the 

day of such request, at which meeting he, and the Council representatives or other persons chosen by each 
village party to the dispute to speak for it before the Council, may summon all witnesses having evidence to 
give in the matter, and may examine them.

When the Council has heard all the evidence and examined the witnesses to its satisfaction, it shall hold a 
secret meeting which shall not be attended by the representatives of the villages party to the dispute, and after 
full and careful consideration and discussion, shall vote on a decision. Such decision shall become effective 
when it is carried by a majority of the Council members present. The Council shall keep a record of the 
evidence and the reasons for its decision.

SECTION 2. If both the Chairman and the Vice Chairman are representatives of villages party to the 

dispute, the Council shall elect a temporary Chairman to serve for the duration of the trial.

SECTION 3. If any village party to the dispute feels that the decision of the Council in such case is unjust, 

the Kikmongwi of that village may notify the Superintendent within ten (10) days and the decision of the 
Council shall then be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, within ninety (90) days thereafter, in 
the manner provided in Article VI, Section 2.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1. All resident members of the Tribe shall be given equal opportunities to share in the 

economic resources and activities of the jurisdiction.

SECTION 2. All members of the Tribe shall be free to worship in their own way, to speak and write their 

opinion, and to meet together.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - AMENDMENT

 
 Any representative may propose an amendment to this Constitution and By-Laws at any meeting of the 
Council. Such proposed amendment may be discussed at that meeting, but no vote shall be taken on it until 
the next following meeting of the Council. If the Council shall then approve such proposed amendment by a 
majority vote, it shall request the Secretary of the Interior to call a referendum for accepting or rejecting 
such amendment. It shall then be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call such referendum, at which 
the proposed amendment may be adopted subject to the Secretary's approval, in the same manner as 
provided for the adoption and approval of this Constitution and By-Laws.
 
 

ARTICLE XI  -TAXATION

 
 SECTION 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall, subject to the express limitations contained in this 

Constitution and the laws of the United States, have the power to impose duties, fees, taxes, and assessments 
on any person, corporation or association residing or doing business within the Hopi Reservation, 
PROVIDED, That the Tribal Council shall not have the power to impose a personal income tax.

SECTION 2. No tax imposed by the Tribal Council under Section 1 of this Article shall become effective 

unless approved by a majority vote of the eligible voters of the Hopi Tribe voting in a referendum called for 
that purpose pursuant to Section 8 of Article IV of this Constitution.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE HOPI TRIBE

ARTICLE I  - DUTIES AND QUALIFICATIONS OF OFFICERS

 
 SECTION 1. The Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the Tribal Council. He shall perform all 

duties of a Chairman fairly and impartially, and exercise any authority delegated to him by the Council.

He shall vote only in case of a tie.

SECTION 2. The Vice Chairman shall help the Chairman in his duties when called upon to do so, and 

in the absence of the Chairman shall act as Chairman with all the attendant powers and duties.

SECTION 3. The representatives shall perform the duties of the Council, set forth in this Constitution 

and By-Laws. They shall inform the people of their villages of the matters discussed and the actions 
taken, and they shall fairly and truly represent the people of their villages.

SECTION 4. The Secretary shall write all tribal correspondence, as authorized by the Council, and shall 

keep an accurate record of all action of regular and special meetings of the Council. He shall keep a copy 
of such records in good order and available to the general public and shall send another copy of them, 
following each meeting of the Council, to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction. He shall have a vote in 
the Council only if he is a regular representative.

The Secretary must be a resident member of the Hopi Tribe, and must be able to speak the Hopi 

language fluently, and to read and write English well.

SECTION 5. The Treasurer shall receive, receipt for, and take care of all funds in the custody of the 
Council, and deposit them in a bank or elsewhere as directed by the Council. He shall make payments 
therefrom only when authorized by a resolution of the Council, and in the manner authorized. He shall 
keep a faithful record of such funds, and shall report fully on receipts, payments, and amounts in hand at 
all regular meetings of the Council and whenever requested to do so by the Council. His accounts shall be 
open to public inspection.

He shall have a vote in the Council only if he is a regular representative.

The Treasurer may be required by the Council to give a bond satisfactory to the Council and to the 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

The Treasurer must be a resident member of the Hopi Tribe, and must be able to speak the Hopi 

language fluently and to read and write English well.

SECTION 6. The interpreter or interpreters shall be resident members of the Hopi Tribe, and shall be able 

to interpret fluently and accurately in the Hopi, English, and Navajo languages, and shall do so whenever 
requested by the Council. Interpreters shall have a vote in the Council only when they are regular 
representatives.

SECTION 7. The Sergeant-at-Arms, at the orders of the Chairman, shall enforce order in the Council, and 

shall summon all persons required to appear before the Council, and deliver notices of special meetings, 
and perform such other duties as may be required of him by the Council. The Sergeant-at-Arms shall be a 
resident member of the Hopi Tribe, and must be able to speak Hopi fluently, and to speak English.

SECTION 8. The qualifications and duties of all committees and officers appointed by the Council shall 
be clearly defined by resolution of the Tribal Council at the time the positions are created. Such committees 
or officers shall report to the Council whenever required.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEETINGS OF THE COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held on the first day of December, March, 

June, and September, at such places as shall be determined by the Council.

SECTION 2. Within sixteen (16) days after this Constitution goes into effect, the villages shall choose 

their representatives for the first term of one (1) year, and on the sixteenth day the first meeting of the 
Council shall be held at Oraibi Day School.

SECTION 3. Special meetings of the Council shall be called by the Chairman in his discretion or at the 
request of four (4) representatives, or in the case of a dispute between villages, as provided in Article VIII of 
the Constitution. Notice of special meetings shall be delivered to each representative not less than eight (8) 
days before such meeting, together with a statement of the business to be discussed thereat.

SECTION 4. All members of the Hopi Tribe may attend any meeting of the Council, but they may not 

speak, except by invitation of the Council. Non-members may be invited by the Council to attend any 
meeting and to address it.

SECTION 5. The Council may employ, or may request the Superintendent of the jurisdiction to furnish, 

a clerk trained in shorthand, to take down verbatim minutes of any meeting.

SECTION 6.  When the Council desires advise of, or consultation with, any officer of the Federal 

Government, it may invite him to attend any meeting and may give him the privilege of the floor.
 
 

ARTICLE III - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS

 
 All ordinances and resolutions shall be recorded and available at all times for the information and 
education of the Tribe. Copies of all ordinances shall be posted from time to time in a public place in 
each village.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - EAGLE HUNTING TERRITORIES AND SHRINES

 
 The Tribal Council shall negotiate with the United States Government agencies concerned, and with 
other tribes and other persons concerned, in order to secure protection of the right of the Hopi Tribe to 
hunt for eagles in its traditional territories, and to secure adequate protection for its outlying, established 
shrines.

The Tribal Council may appoint delegates to speak for the Tribe at the All-Pueblo Council, and to report 

to the Council and the Tribe on all proceedings thereof.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ALL-PUEBLO COUNCIL

ARTICLE VI - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

 
 This Constitution and By-Laws, when ratified by a majority vote of the adult members of the Hopi 
Tribe voting at a referendum called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, PROVIDED, that at 
least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote at such referendum, shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior, and if approved, shall take effect from the date of approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved September 30, 1936, by the Secretary of the Interior, the attached 

Constitution and By-laws was submitted for ratification to the Hopi Triberesiding on the Hopi 
Reservation, and was on October 24, 1936, duly adopted by a vote of 651 for, and 104 against, in an 
election in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 
of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15,1935(49 
Stat. 378).

George Coochise, Chairman of Election Board.

Albert Yava, Secretary of Election Board.

A. G. Hutton, Superintendent.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the Unites States of America, by virtue of the authority 

granted me by the act of June 18,1934(48Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached 
Constitution andBy-laws oftheHopi Tribe.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by file Interior Department or by the Office of Indian 
Affairs, so far as they may be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws 
are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered to abide by the provisions of the said 

Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended December 14, 1936.

John Collier, Commissioner of Indian Affairs 

Harold L Ickles, Secretary of the Interior [Seal] 

Washington, D.C., December 19,1936
 
  
  
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
 
 of the  
 
BOP I TRIBE 
ARIZONA

 
 AUG - 1 1969 
 

AMENDMENT I


Section 3 of Article II, Membership, shall be deleted in its entirety.

The first sentence of Article IV, The Tribal Council, shall be 
amended to read:

Section 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall consist of 
a chairman, vice chairman and representatives from the 
various villages.

Section 2 of Article IV, The Tribal Council, shall be amended in its 
entirety to read as follows:

Sec. 2. The term of office of the representatives 
shall be two years, except that at the first election 
or choosing of representatives following the adoption 
of this section, approximately one-half of the 
representatives shall serve for a term of one year. 
The determination as to which representatives shall 
serve for one year shall be made by the tribal council 
and announced to each village Kickmongwi or Governor 
on or before the first day of October 1969. Repre
sentatives may serve any number of terms in succession 
or otherwise.

Section 7 of Article IV, The Tribal Council, shall be amended to read 
as follows:

Sec. 7. The chairman and vice chairman shall be elected 
by secret ballot by all members of the Hopi Tribe. The 
tribal council shall choose from its own member or from 
other members of the tribe, a secretary, treasurer, 
sergeant-at-arms and interpreters and much other 
officers and committees as it may determine neces
sary, subject to the provisions of the Bylaws, 
Article I.

Article IV, The Tribal Council, shall be amended by adding to it 
Sections 8, 9, 10, 11, 12 and 13 as follows:

Sec. 8. All stokers of the Hopi Tribe twenty-one years 
of age or over shall be qualified to vote in any elec
tion or referendum, other than village elections and 
referendums under such rules and regulations as say 
be prescribed by the Hopi Tribal Council and approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 9. The chairman and vice chairman shall each serve 
for a term of four years. Candidates for the offices 
of chairman and vice chairman shall be members of the 
Hopi Tribe, twenty-five years of age or older and must 
be able to speak the Hopi language fluently. Each 
candidate for either of said offices must also have 
lived on the Hopi Reservation for not less than two 
years immediately preceding his announcement of such 
candidacy.

Sec. 10. Candidates for the offices of chairman and 
vice chairman say declare their candidacy by filing 
with the tribal secretary or tribal chairman or vice 
chairman a petition signed by at least ten adult 
members of the tribe at least 15 days before the date 
set for the election. It shall be the duty of the secre
tary to post the names of the qualified candidates for 
both the primary and final elections in a public place 
in each village at least ten days prior to the election.

Sec. 11. A primary election shall be held on the first 
Wednesday in November in 1969 and on the first Wednesday 
in November in every fourth year thereafter, provided 
that, no primary election shall be held in the years 
when there shall be no more than two candidates for 
either of the offices of chairman and vice chairman.

The two candidates in a primary election, receiving the 
highest number of votes for each of said offices of 
chairman and vice chairman shall have their names 
entered in the final election. In the event there 
are not more than two candidates for either of such 
offices those candidates with no more than one  
competing candidate shall have their eases entered 
in the final election without the necessity of a 
primary election.

Sec. 12. The general election shall be held on the 
third Wednesday in November 1969 and on the third
Wednesday in November in every fourth year thereafter.

Sec. 13. Inauguration of the chairman and vice chairman 
shall take place at the first regular tribal council 
meeting following their election.
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT CONSTITUTION AND 

 
 BYLAWS of 
the HOPI TRIBEARIZONA 
 

AMENDMENT II

 
 Article V, Vacancies and Removal from Office, shall be amended as 
follows:

Section 1. Any chairman, vice chairman, representative 
or other officer found guilty in a tribal or other court 
of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, of a felony, or
of drunkenness, shall be automatically removed from 
offices, and the council shall refuse to recognize him.

Section 3, paragraph 3 shall be added as follows:

Vacancies occurring for any reason in the offices 
of chairman and vice chairman or in the office 
of any other officer shall be filled for the rest
of the term in the same manner as those officers 
are ordinarily chosen.

Harrison Loesch
 
 

I,

APPROVAL

 
 Assistant

Secretary of the

Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority 

granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, 

do hereby approve the attached Amendments I and II to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.

Approval Recomended:

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D.C.

Date: AUG - 1 1969
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE

HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

 
 Amendment III

Article II, Membership, Section 1, subsections 1(a), 1(b) and 1(c) shall 
be amended as follows:

Section 1. Membership in the Hopi Tribe shall be as fellows:

(a)  All persons whose names appear on the census roll of the Hopi 
Tribe as of December 31, 1937, provided that corrections may be made 
at any time to said roll by the Tribal Council, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  All children born after December 31, 1937, whose father and 
mother are both members of the Hopi Tribe.

(c)  All children bom after December 31, 1937, whose mother is 
a member of the Hopi Tribe, and whose father is a member of some 
other tribe.

Article II, Section 1, subsection 1(d) is not being amended.
 
 

CERTIFICATES OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Phoenix Area Office

on June 26, 1979, the attached Amendment III to

the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe, was submitted 

to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona and was 

on January 30, 1980, duly adopted by a vote of

607 for and 74 against, in an election in which at 

least 30 per cent of the 977 entitled to vote cast their 

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization

Act of June 13, 1934, (48 Stat. 984) as amended by the Act of

June 15, 1934, (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 Amendment No. III

I, Curtis Geiogomah, Deputy Phoenix Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, 

by virtue of the authority delegated to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 

the Act of June 13, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and redelegated to me, 

do hereby approve the foregoing Amendment No. III to the Constitution and 

Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona; provided that nothing in this approval 

shall be construed as authorizing any action under the Constitution and Bylaws 

that would be contrary to Federal Law.

Phoenix, Arizona 

Dates: FEB 14 1980
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

 
 AMENDMENT NO. A

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP shall be amended in its entirety to read as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1.  The following persons shall be enrolled members of the Hopi Tribe.

All persons whose names appear on the Census Roll of the Hopi Tribe as of 
December 31, 1937, as corrected and adopted by the Hops Tribal Council; 
PROVIDED, That subsequent corrections may be made to said roil by the Hopi 
Tribal Council at any time with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Section 2.  After the effective date of this amendment, the following persons shall 
be eligible for enrolled membership to the Hopi Tribe.

(a)  All persons of one-fourth (1/4) degree Hopi Indian blood or more, or 
one-fourth (1/4) degree Tewa Indian blood or more, or one-fourth (1/4) 
degree Hopi-Tew Indian blood or more combined, born after December 31, 
1937, who are not enrolled with any other Indian Tribe.

(b)  For the purpose of determining enrolled membership, Hopi Indian blood, 
Tewa Indian blood, and Hopi-Tewa Indian blood shall mean biological lineal 
descent from any Hopi or Tewa Indian person whose name appears on the 
Corrected Membership Roll of the Hopi Tribe as defined in Section 1.

Section 3.  Persons Already Enrolled. All persons properly enrolled as members 
of the Hopi Tribe as of the effective date of this amendment shall continue to be 
members.

Section 4.  Village Membership. Village membership shall be determined by the 
individual Hopi Villages.

Section 5.  Hopi Enrollment Ordinance. Tire Hopi Tribal Council shall adopt, 
and from time to time may amend, an enrollment ordinance not inconsistent with 
this Article, setting forth the manner in which this Article shall be implemented 
and administered.

Having been duty adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment A 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. IV to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.

certificate of results of ELECTION

Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 1993, Amendment No. A to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona
was submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly
adoptod/rejecied by a vote of 364 for, and 134 against, and 9 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (38%) of the 

776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D. M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment A, hereinafter known as Amendment No. IV, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

G- aCv 
 
  
 

I

 
 Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT B


Section 8 of ARTICLE IV - THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to read as follows:

Section 8. All members of the Hopi Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or over shall 
be qualified to vote in any election or referendum other than village elections and 
referendums under such rules and regulations as may be prescribed by the Hopi 
Tribal Council.

Having been duly adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment B 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. V to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment B to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly
adopted/rejected by a vote of 343 for, and 154 against, and 0 cast
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended, and delegated to 

me by 230 DM 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment B, hereinafter known as Amendment No. V, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 

date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 

this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Iridian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date

29
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT C

 
 Section 1(e) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 
eliminate Secretarial approval to read as follows:

(e) To raise and take care of a tribal council fond by accepting grants or gifts 
from any person, State, or the United States Government, or by charging 
persons doing business within the Reservation reasonable license fees.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment C 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. VI to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment C to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly
adopted/rejccted by a vote of 325 for, and 169 against, and 0 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment C, hereinafter known as Amendment No. VI, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 

this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada E, Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D C.

Date: 

amendment 
 
 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT D

 
 Section 1(g) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 
eliminate Secretarial approval to read as follows:

(g) To make ordinances io protect the peace and welfare of the Tribe, and to set 
up courts for the settlement of claims and disputes, and for the trial and 
punishment of Indians within the jurisdiction charged with offenses against 
such ordinances.

Having been duty adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment D 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. VII to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial electron authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment D to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tnbe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly 
adopted/rejected by a vote of 311 for, and 178 against, and 0 cast
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of 
the
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I,  Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment D, hereinafter known as Amendment No . VII, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ada & Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: DEC 30 1993

35
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT E

 
 Section 1 (i) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 
eliminate Secretarial approval to read as follows.

(i)  To provide by ordinance for removal or exclusion from the jurisdiction of 
any non-members whose presence may be harmful to the members of the 

Tribe.

Having been duly adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment E 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. VIII to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment E to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993, duly 
adopted/rejected by a vote of  329 for, and 162 against, and 0 cast
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment E, hereinafter known as Amendment No. VIII, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: DEC 30  1993
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT F

 
 Section 1(b) of ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL shall be amended to 

read as follows:

(b) To employ lawyers, the choice of Lawyers and fixing of fees to be subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior so long as required by 

Federal law.

Having been duty adopted and approved. Proposed Amendment F 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. IX to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
HOPI TRIBE OF ARIZONA

AMENDMENT G

 
 The Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe shall be amended by adding a new article entitled 
ARTICLE XI - TAXATION to read as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE XI - TAXATION

 
 Section 1. The Hopi Tribal Council shall, subject to the express limitations 
contained in this Constitution and the laws of the Unified States, have the power 
to impose duties, fees, taxes, and assessments on any person, corporation or 
association residing or doing business within foe Hopi Reservation, PROVIDED, 
That the Tribal Council shall not have the power to impose a personal income tax.

Section 2. No tax imposed by the Tribal Council under Section I of this Article 
shall become effective unless approved by a majority vote of the eligible voters 
of the Hopi Tribe voting in a referendum called for that purpose pursuant to 
Section 8 of Article IV of this Constitution.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment G 
is hereby designated as Amendment No. X to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on 
September 8, 1993, Amendment F to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona was 
submitted to the qualified voters of the Hopi Tribe, and was on Dec. 7, 1993 duly
adopted/rejected by a vote of 344 for, and 144 against, and 0 cast
ballots found spoiled or mutilated. In an election in which at least thirty percentt (30%) of the 
776 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48Slat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12/07/93
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Ada E. Deer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to 
me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve Amendment F, hereinafter known as Amendment No, IX, 
to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Hopi Tribe of Arizona. This Amendment is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Ci . - r' /

Ada E. Deer
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs

Washington, D, C.

Date: DEC 30 1993

United States Department of the Interior 
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
WESTERN REGIONAL OFFICE
 
 2600 North Central Avenue, Floor 

Phoenix, Arizona 85004

JUN 08 

2017

JUN 16 2017

Honorable Herman G. Honanie
Chairman, Hopi Tribe
PO Box 123
Kykotsmovi, Arizona 86039

Dear Chairman Honanie:

The Hopi Tribe (Tribe) submitted a request for the Secretary of the Interior to call and conduct a 
Secretarial election on the proposed amendments to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi 
Tribe (Constitution). The Tribe submitted seven proposed amendments approved by Resolution 
H-007-2017. On February 24, 2017, the Tribe submitted an Eligible Voters List which was 
certified by resolution H-024-2017, to complete the Tribe’s request for a Secretarial election. On 
March 15, 2017, a letter was provided to the Tribe which outlined concerns regarding the 
proposed amendments. The Tribe declined March 23, 2017, by letter, to revise any of the 
proposed amendments and requested to continue with the Secretarial election process.

The Regional Director authorized the Superintendent, Hopi Agency to call and conduct the Hopi 
Secretarial election by memorandum dated April 3, 2017. The Secretarial election, conducted by 
mail out ballot, concluded on May 25, 2017.

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, signed by the Secretarial Election Board 
Members on May 25, 2017, the proposed Amendment A was adopted by a vote of 296 for and 
90 against and 6 cast ballots found to be spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 
698 registered voters cast their ballot.

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, signed by the Secretarial Election Board 
Members on May 25, 2017,the proposed Amendment B was adopted by a vote of 322 for and 
64 against and 6 cast ballots found to be spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 
698 registered voters cast their ballot.

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, signed by the Secretarial Election Board 
Members on May 25, 2017, the proposed Amendment C was adopted by a vote of 358 for and 
28 against and 5 cast ballots found to be spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 
698 registered voters cast their ballot

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, signed by the Secretarial Election Board 
Members on May 25, 2017, the proposed Amendment D was adopted by a vote of 340 for and 

46 against and 6 cast ballots found to be spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 
698 registered voters cast their ballot

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, signed by the Secretarial Election Board 
Members on May 25, 2017, the proposed Amendment E was adopted by a vote of 338 for and 
46 against and 7 cast ballots found to be spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 
698 registered voters cast their ballot

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election, signed by the Secretarial Election Board 
Members on May 25, 2017, the proposed Amendment F was adopted by a vote of 341 for and 
35 against and 6 cast ballots found to be spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 
698 registered voters cast their ballot.

As evidenced by the Certificate of Results of Election signed by the Secretarial Election Board 
Members on May 25, 2017, the proposed Amendment G was adopted by a vote of 357 for and 
29 against and 5 cast ballots found to be spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 
698 registered voters cast their ballot.

There were no challenges submitted regarding the results of the Secretarial election, therefore, by 
my signature on the enclosed Certificates of Approval, the proposed Amendments A-G are 
hereby approved pursuant to the authority delegated to me by the Secretary of the Interior by 
3IAM4.

Enclosed with this letter are the amendments, the original Certificates of Approval and the 
Certificate of Remits of Election for your files. As a last note, my decision to approve these 
amendments are a final agency action 25 C.F.R.  81.45; 81.45(f). Pursuant to the revised 
Secretarial election regulations, this decision is a final agency action that is not "subject to appeal 
to a superior authority fat the Department.” 25 C.F.R.  2.6.

Congratulations on a successfol Secretarial election and should you have any questions, please 
contact Ms. Sharlot Johnson, Regional Tribal Operations Officer, or Ms. Sophia Tones, Tribal 
Operations Specialist, for assistance at (602) 379-6786.

Sincerely,

cc: Superintendent, Hopi Agency 

Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

 
 Proposed Amendment A

Article IV - The Tribal Council

See. 9., second sentence shall be amended to read as follows:

Candidates for the offices of chairman and vice chairman shall be members of the Hopi Tribe, 
twenty-five years of age or older and must speak the Hopi language.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment A is hereby designated as
Amendment No. XI to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Under a Secretarial election authorized by Bryan Bowker, Regional Director, Western Region, 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, on  APR 0 3 2017 

the attached Amendment A to the Constitution

and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe was submitted to the registered voters of the tribe and on 

 duly adopted/rejected by a vote of 296 for and
May 25, 2017

90 against and 6 cast ballots found spoiled in an election in which 

at least 30 percent of the 698 registered voters cast their ballot in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended.

Date: May 25, 2017

CERTIFICATE OF approval

Amendment A, to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Trifee which was adopted by the 

qualified voters of the Tribe on May 25, 2017, is hereby approved and designated as 

Amendment XI pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended and re-delegated to me under 3IAM4. This approval 

is effective as of this date; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal Law.

6/8/17 

Date
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

 
 Proposed Amendment B

Article IV - The Tribal Council

Sec. 9., third sentence shall be amended to read as follows:

Each candidate for either of said offices must also have a primary and physical residency on the 
Hopi Reservation for not less than two years immediately preceding his announcement of such 
candidacy.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment B is hereby designated as
Amendment No. XII to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Under a Secretarial election authorized by Bryan Bowker, Regional Director, Western Region, 
Bureau of lndian Affairs, on APR 03 2017 the attached Amendment B to the Constitution

and By-laws of the Hopi Trite was submitted to the registered voters of the tribe and on 

64 against and 6 cast ballots found spoiled in an election in which

May 25, 2017 duly adopted by a vote of 322 for and

at least 30 percent of the 698 registered voters cast their ballot in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended.

Date: May 25, 2017
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 Amendment B, to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe which was adopted by the 

qualified voters of the Tribe on May 25, 2017, is hereby approved and designated as 

Amendment XII pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended and re-delegated to me under 3 IAM 4. This approval 

is effective as of this date; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal Law.

6/8/17Date
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 
THE HOPI TRIBE 
ARIZONA

 
 Article IV - The Tribal Council

Sec. 9., shall add the following sentence to the end of the paragraph to read as follows:

A candidate must not have been convicted of a felony or any crime involving moral turpitude
within ten (10) years of candidacy.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment C is hereby designated as 
Amendment No. XIII to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 
THE HOPI TRIBE 
ARIZONA

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Under a Secretarial election authorized by Bryan Bowker, Regional Director, Western Region, 

Bureau of Indian Affairs. on APR 03 2017 the attached Amendment C to the Constitution 

and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe was submitted to the registered voters of the tribe and on

May 25, 2017 duly adopted by a vote of 358 for and 
28 against and 5 cast ballots found spoiled in an election in which

at least 30 percent of the 698 registered voters east their ballot in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: May 25, 2017
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 Amendment C, to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe which was adopted by the 

qualified voters of the Tribe on May 25, 2017, is hereby approved and designated as

Amendment XIII pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended and re-delegated to me under 3 IAM 4. This approval 

is effective as of this date; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal Law.

6/8/17

Date
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

 
 Article IV - The Tribal Council

Sec. 10., shall be amended to read as follows:

Candidates for the offices of Chairman and Vice Chairman shall declare their candidacy with the 
Hopi Election Board. Candidacy procedures will be made available through the Hopi Election 
Board and will follow Hopi Election Ordinance #34 of the Hopi Tribe.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment D is hereby designated as
Amendment No. XIV to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 
THE HOPI TRIBE 
ARIZONA

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Under a Secretarial election authorized by Bryan Bowker, Regional Director, Western Region, 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, on APR 03 2017 the attached Amendment D to the Constitution 

and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe was submitted to the registered voters of the tribe and on

May 25, 2017 duly adopted by a vote of 340 for and

46 against and 6 cast ballots found spoiled in an election in which 

at least 30 percent of the 698 registered voters cast their ballot in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: May 25, 2017

certificate of approval

Amendment D, to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe which was adopted by the 

qualified voters of the Tribe on May 25, 2017, is hereby approved and designated as 

Amendment XIV pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended and re-delegated to me under 3IAM 4. This approval 

is effective as of this date; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal Law.

6/8/17
Date
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

 
 Proposed Amendment E

Article IV - The Tribal Council

Sec. 11., shall be amended to read as follows:

A primary election shall be held on “the second Thursday to September in 2017 and on the 
second Thursday to September to every fourth year thereafter.”

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment E is hereby designated as
Amendment No. XV to the Constitution and By-law of the Hopi Tribe
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Under a Secretarial election authorized by Bryan Bowker, Regional Director, Western Region, 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, on APR 03 2017 the attached Amendment E to the Constitution 

and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe was submitted to the registered voters of the tribe and on 

46 against and 7 cast ballots found spoiled in an election in which

May 25, 2017 duly adopted by a vote of 338 for and

at least 30 percent of the 698 registered voters cast their ballot in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended.

Date: May 25, 2017

certificate of approval

Amendment E, to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe which was adopted by the 

qualified voters of the Tribe on May 25, 2017, is hereby approved and designated as 

Amendment XV pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended and re-delegated to me under 31AM 4. This approval 

is effective as of this date; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal Law.

6/8/17

Date
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

 
 Proposed Amendment F

Article IV - The Tribal Council

Sec, 12., shall be amended to read as follows:

The final election shall be held on the second Thursday in November 2017 and on the second 
Thursday in every fourth year thereafter.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment F is hereby designated as
Amendment No. XVI to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 
THE HOPI TRIBE 
ARIZONA

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Undera Secretarial election authorized by Bryan Bowker, Regional Director, Western Region,

Amendment F to the Constitution
Bureau of Indian Affairs, on 
 the attached 
APR 03 2017

and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe was submitted to the registered voters of the tribe and on

May 25, 2017 duly adopted by a vote of 341 for and 35 

against and 6 cast ballots found spoiled in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 698 registered voters cast their ballot in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended.

Date: May 25, 2017
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 Amendment F, to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe which was adopted by the 

qualified voters of the Tribe on May 25, 2017, is hereby approved and designated as 

Amendment XVI pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended and re-delegated to me under 3 IAM 4. This approval 

is effective as of this date; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal Law.

6/8/17

Date
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF
THE HOPI TRIBE
ARIZONA

 
 Proposed Amendment G

Article V  - Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 3, third paragraph shall be amended to read as follows:

Vacancies occurring for any reason in the offices of chairman and vice chairman or in the office 
of any other officer shall be filled for the rest of the term in the same manner as those officers are 
ordinarily chosen through a Special Election to fill the vacancies of the Chairman, Vice 
Chairman or both following the Special Election process as stated in Hopi Election Ordinance 
#34.

Having been duly adopted and approved, Proposed Amendment G is hereby designated as
Amendment No. XVII to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe

CONSTITUTION and by-laws of 
 
 
THE HOPI TRIBE 
ARIZONA

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Under a Secretarial election authorized by Bryan Bowker, Regional Director, Western Region, 

Bureau of Indian Affairs, on APR 03 2017 the attached Amendment G to the Constitution

and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe was submitted to the registered voters of the tribe and on

May 25, 2017 duly adopted by a vote of 357 for and

29 against and 5 cast ballots found spoiled in an election in which 

at least 30 percent of the 698 registered voters cast their ballot in accordance with

Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: May 25, 2017

CERTIFICATE OF approval

Amendment G, to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi Tribe which was adopted by the 

qualified voters of the Tribe on May 25, 2017, is hereby approved and designated as 

Amendment XVII pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act 

of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended and re-delegated to me under 3 IAM 4. This 

approval is effective as of this date; provided that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 

authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal Law.

6/8/17

Date

United States Department of the Interior 
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
HOPI AGENCY
 
 FO. Box 158
Reams Canyon, AZ 86034

jon 08 nn

Memorandum

To:

Through:

From:

Chair of the Secretarial Election Board, Hopi Secretarial Election

Subject:

Hopi Tribe’s Secretarial Election

The Hopi Tribe (Tribe) submitted a request for the Secretary of the Interior to call and conduct a 
Secretarial election on the proposed amendments to the Constitution and By-laws of the Hopi 
Tribe (Constitution). By resolution H-007-2017, the Tribe submitted seven proposed 
amendments. The Tribe completed its request February 24, 2017, by submitting the Tribe’s 
eligible voters list which was certified by resolution H-024-2017 by the Tribal Council. On 
March 15, 2017, a letter Regional Director, Western Region, was provided to the Tribe which 
outlined concerns regarding the proposed amendments. The Tribe responded March 23, 2017, 
and stated that they do not wish to revise any of the proposed amendments and wish to continue 
with the Secretarial election process.

The Regional Director authorized the Superintendent, Hopi Agency to call and conduct the Hopi 
Secretarial election pursuant to Title 25 Federal Code of Regulations Part 81. The Tribe 
appointed Miona Kaping, Alfonso Sakeva, and Darrell Kewanwytewa as Tribal representatives 
to be on the Secretarial Election Board and the Superintendent selected a Chair of the Secretarial 
Election Board, Sophia Torres, Regional Tribal Operations Specialist. The Superintendent
contracted the administrative portion of the election to the Hopi Tribe’s Tribal Operations 
Program. The Tribe, then, contracted with Automated Election Services (AES) to prepare the 
Election materials i.e.; Registration information packets: Election Packets, voting machines to 
count ballots and final reports on the election results for posting. Registration packets and 
ballots were mailed by AES.

The Secretarial Election Board, the Hopi Tribal Operations Program, and the Superintendent’s 
Office met April 7, 2017, for the first meeting to set the Secretarial election schedule and discuss 
the election process. The date of April 10, 2017, was set to mail out the registration packets; 
however, the AES was unable to complete the packets by that deadline. The packets were sent 
out April 13, 2017, and the registration deadline was set for April 26, 2017. There were 10,965 
eligible voters; however, the total packets mailed were 10, 575. We had 389 eligible voters with 
no addresses listed on the Eligible Voters List received by the Tribe. Our team decided to post a 

list of names of those with no addresses at the local oommunities so they may request a 
registration packet from the Hopi Agency or Hopi Tribal Operations Program. We allowed the 
option of hand delivery or to return the registration by mail. We had 698 eligible voters register.

During the beginning of the Secretarial election process, the Secretarial Election Board worked 
with the Hopi Tribal Government program to ensure information regarding the Secretarial 
election was provided to the members in many formats. With the help of the Hopi Tribal 
Government program, we were successfully able to put information regarding the Secretarial 
election on tie Hopi tribal Website, the Hopi Tribe’s official newspaper, the Hopi Tutuveni, and 

posted the information at all the community offices and other locations.

However, we did receive complaints during the registration timeframe from members who called 
near the deadline of registration stating they did not know a Secretarial election was going on or 
they would have checked their mail. Some lived too far from the Agency to be able to dropoff 
their registration and would not have enough time to mail one back. We also had calls regarding 
the language used in proposed Amendment B and the grammatical errors contained in the 
proposed amendment. We were also asked why there will not be any precinct voting for this 
election. We referred the members with questions regarding the language in Amendment B to 
the Tribe for an answer; however, we did provide a response regardin g the other questions.

The Superintendent continued to work with the Hopi Tribal Council to correct the typographical 
errors in the proposed Amendments. As a result, the Hopi Tribal Council provided a letter dated 
April 25, 2017, which notified the Bureau of Indian Affairs that by motion and unanimous vote 
the Hopi Tribal Council approved to amend the language to the proposed Amendment B and E as 
presented by the BIA, Hopi Agency Superintendent by letter April 12, 2017. This approval 
corrected grammatical errors to proposed amendments B and E. The Regional Director by 
memorandum dated April 28, 2017, approved changes be made by the Secretarial Election Board 
to reflect the grammatical error corrections. This was completed before the ballot packets were 
mailed out.

We posted the Registered Voters List April 26, 2017, and challenges to this list were due May 3, 
2017. There were no challenges to the Registered Voters List.

AES mailed out the 698 ballot packets to the registered voters, May 5, 2017. The ballots were 
due to the Hopi Agency by 4:00 p.m. May 25, 2017.

The Secretarial Election Board, Agency personnel, and the Hopi Tribal Operations Program were 
present on foe last day for registered voters to submit ballots which had to be received by 4:00 
p.m. by May 25, 2017. We accepted mailed ballots or hand delivered ballots.

Below is a breakdown of the results of the Hopi Secretarial election:

Proposed 
Amendment
 
 

A
B
C
D
E
F
G

 
 Total 
Registered 
Voters
698
698
698
698
698
698
698

Voted For

Voted
Against

Total Ballots 
Spoiled

Percentage 
Participation

296
322
358
340
338
341
357

90
64
28
46
46
35
29

6
6
5
6
7
6
5

56%
56%
56%
56%
56%
55%
56%

All proposed amendments passed by a high margin and the percentage participated exceeded the 
30% participation requirement of those who registered to vote. We had some issues with AES 
and their voting tabulator machines and had to count the majority of the ballots by hand. Thanks 
to the members of the Secretarial Election Board and the Hopi Agency staff who completed the 
final tabulation.

We posted the results of the Secretarial election the same day and to other locations the day after 
the election, including the Tribe’s official website. The last day to challenge the election was 
May 30, 2017 at 4:00 p.m. No challenges were filed on the results of the Secretarial election.

We are submitting the following for appropriate action:

1)  The original text of the material voted on;
2)  The Eligible Voter’s List;
3)  The Secretarial Election Notice Packet;
4)  The original completed Certificate of Results of Election; and
5)  This written report on the Secretarial election activities

If you have any questions, please contact the Superintendent at (928) 738-2223 or at the address 
above.

Attachments

cc: Superintendent, Hopi Agency w/o attachments

Hopi Tribal Operations Program w/o attachments

