 
  
 CONSTITUTION  
 
OF THE HOPLAND BAND OF POMO INDIANS 
MENDOCINO COUNTY, CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE

 
 We the adult members of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians, located in 

Mendocino County, State of California, prepare this document of self-government with 

the hope that it will enable us to live as we have always lived on our homelands with 

respect for the land and all growing things on it.

Further, we proclaim we are organizing for the common good, the preservation of 

our cultural traditions, the protection of our homelands, the continuous improvement of 

the social and economic standard of our people, the establishment of a democratically 

representative government for present and future generations of the Hopland Band of 

Pomo Indians, and to avail ourselves of the authorities conferred by the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended.

The name of this organization shall be known as the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - NAME

ARTICLE II  - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians shall extend to all lands, water, 

and persons within the exterior boundaries of the Hopland Indian Reservation or 

Rancheria, and any other lands in which the Band acquires ownership, management, 

use or occupancy by virtue of purchase, gift, act of Congress or otherwise.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. As used in this section the word "descent” shall mean a person who is a 

direct lineal descendant of a person who is racially a Hopland Indian. The membership 

of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians shall consist of:

(a) 

All persons of Hopland Band Indian descent who were listed as 

distributees or dependent members of distributees in the Hopland Rancheria Plan for 

the Distribution of the Assets of the Hopland Reservation as approved by the Secretary 

on May 22, 1961.

(b) 

All lineal descendants of any person of Hopland Band Indian descent 

whose name appears as a distributee or dependent member of a distributee on the 

Plan for the Distribution of Assets of the Hopland Reservation as approved by the 

Secretary on May 22, 1961.

(c) 

All persons of Hopland Band Indian descent who have ever leased, 

owned, received, or were assigned land on the Hopland Reservation.

(d) 

All other persons of Indian descent who can to the satisfaction of the 

general council, demonstrate a substantial connection with the Hopland Reservation. 

The tribal council shall screen all applicants for acceptability under this clause and 

acceptance as members shall be subject to a majority vote of the general council at the 

next regularly scheduled meeting at which a quorum is present.

Section 2. A person who has been allotted or received a land use assignment on 

another reservation shall not be enrolled as a member of the Hopland Reservation; 

provided, however, that nothing in this section shall prevent a person who has inherited 

an allotment or land use assignment on another Indian reservation and who is 

otherwise eligible for enrollment under this Article from being enrolled as a member of 

the Hopland Reservation.

Section 3. A person who is officially enrolled with or is a recognized member of some 

other tribe, reservation or rancheria shall not be enrolled unless such person 

relinquishes affiliation with such tribe, reservation or rancheria to the satisfaction of the 

tribal council. A "recognized member of another tribe, reservation or rancheria" is a 

person whose name is listed on the membership roll of another tribe, reservation or 

rancheria.

Section 4. The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with an 

ordinance adopted by the tribal council. Such ordinance shall contain provisions for 

enrollment and disenrollment procedures, enrollment committees, applications, 

rejection notice, appeals, corrections and provisions for keeping the roll on a current 

basis.

Section 5. Persons who have been refused membership for one reason or another or 

who are subject to loss of membership shall have the right to redress and to be heard 

before the general council of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians. Such a hearing shall 

be conducted at the next regularly scheduled general council meeting at which a 

quorum is present. Upon the completion of such a redress hearing, the tribal council 

shall abide by the majority will and the decision of the general council shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians shall be the 

tribal council. The tribal council shall consist of seven (7) members elected from the

general council. Four (4) members shall constitute a quorum. The tribal council shall 

consist of a chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary and a treasurer and three (3) 

members, each elected by the qualified voters in an election held in accordance with 

this Constitution. The chairperson, vice-chairperson, secretary, and treasurer shall be 

determined by the tribal council.

Section 2. General Council. The general council shall consist of all members of the 

Hopland Band of Pomo Indians who are eighteen (18) years of age or older and are 

duly registered to vote.

Section 3. General Membership. The general membership shall consist of all 

enrolled members of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Voter Qualifications. All enrolled members of the Hopland Band of Pomo 

Indians who are eighteen (18) years of age or older and are duly registered pursuant to 

the Band's voter registration system shall be qualified voters. Residency shall not be a 

requirement of voting.

Section 2. Qualifications of Candidates. A candidate for the position of tribal council 

must be a qualified voter of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians. Individuals convicted 

of a felony will not be permitted to serve on the tribal council unless the conviction has 

been expunged or pardoned. Residency shall not be a requirement for candidacy 

provided that the candidate is a resident of the State of California.

Section 3. All elections of the Band officials shall be by secret ballot.

Section 4. An election committee, appointed by the chairperson and confirmed by the 

tribal council, shall supervise and administer all elections in accordance with this 

Constitution. No person who holds any elective office, or is a candidate for such office, 

shall serve on the election committee.

Section 5. First Elections. The officers of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians in 

office at the time of approval of this Constitution by the general membership shall hold 

office until their successors are duly elected and seated. The election committee shall 

hold a meeting as necessary for the purpose of nominating members to the tribal 

council. The date of such meetings shall coincide with the date of the first such 

meeting following the approval of this Constitution by a majority of the members of the 

Band voting on the Constitution at a special election, but shall be at least twenty-one 

(21) days prior to the date of the first election to elect officers under this Constitution. 

At the first election held under this Constitution, the chairperson, secretary, treasurer 

and one (1) member receiving the highest number of votes shall be elected for a period 

of two (2) years; the vice-chairperson and two (2) members of the tribal council shall be 

elected for a period of one (1) year. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for four (4) 

years and elections shall be held as necessary in accordance with the tribal election 

ordinance and this Constitution.

Section 6. Nominations. The time, place and manner of nominations shall be 

specified in the election ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 7 of this Constitution. 

Section 7. Election Ordinance. An election ordinance shall be adopted by the tribal 

council within one (1) year following the effective date of this Constitution. This 

Constitution will become effective when approved by a majority vote of the members of 

the Band voting at a special election called for that purpose. Such ordinance shall 

include but not be limited to the following mandatory provisions: secret balloting, voter 

registration, nominations of candidates, absentee balloting, maintaining at all times a 

current list of qualified voters, screening of prospective candidates, and a procedure for 

resolving election disputes. Provisions shall also be included regarding the conduct of 

recall and referendum elections and a uniform procedure and format to be used for 

submitting petitions and shall describe how such petitions are to be determined valid. 

Elections to amend this Constitution shall be conducted in accordance with Article XIV 

of this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VI  - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. Removal. Any official found guilty by the tribal council of behavior involving 

misconduct reflecting on the dignity and integrity of the tribal government, malfeasance 

in office, or gross neglect of duty shall be removed from office if at least four (4) 

members of the tribal council vote in favor of such removal. Voting shall be by secret 

ballot and the chairperson shall be entitled to vote. If the accused is a member of the 

tribal council, the accused shall have the right to cast a secret ballot. Before any vote 

for removal is taken, such member or official shall be given a written statement of the 

charges against him/her at least ten (10) days before the meeting of the tribal council at 

which he/she is to appear and he/she shall be given an opportunity to answer any and 

all charges at the designated tribal council meeting. The decision of the tribal council 

shall be final. No member of the tribal council shall preside over the meeting at which 

his/her removal is being considered.

Section 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least thirty percent 

(30%) of the registered voters of the Reservation, it shall be the duty of the tribal council 

to call and conduct within thirty (30) days a special election to vote on the recall of an

elected official. The election shall be conducted pursuant to the election ordinance. If 

a majority of those actually voting favor the recall of the official, the office shall be 

declared vacant and filled in accordance with Article VII. No individual shall be

subjected to recall more than once during his/her term of office.

Section 3. Forfeiture. After due notice, it shall be the duty of the tribal council 

immediately to declare vacant any position and to promptly fill such vacancy in the 

manner provided in Article VII when it is determined that the incumbent:

(a) 

Has resigned.

(b) 

Has been convicted while in office of a felony or crime of moral turpitude.

(c) 

Has falsified his or her affidavit of qualifications of a felony or crime of 

moral turpitude when being certified as a candidate for tribal office.

(d) 

Has been absent, without being excused by the respective body, for more 

than three (3) consecutive regular meetings; provided that the loss of office for such 

reason shall not serve to deny a person from becoming a candidate for office in 

subsequent elections.

(e) 

Has ceased to reside physically in the State of California.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Any office which has been vacated, whether it be by removal, recall or 

forfeiture proceedings pursuant to Article VI of this Constitution, shall be filled as follows 

and such replacement shall serve the unexpired term of office:

(a) 

If the office is vacated during the first or second year of a term, then a 

special election shall be called for the purpose of filling the vacated office.

(b) 

If the office is vacated during the third or fourth year of a term, then the 

tribal council shall appoint the candidate who received the highest number of votes in 

the last tribal council election but did not win a seat on the tribal council so long as that 

candidate remains eligible to serve on the tribal council and agrees to fill the office. 

Section 2. The tribal council shall enact an election ordinance establishing procedures 

for the filling of vacancies created by removal, recall or forfeiture proceedings 

undertaken pursuant to Article VI of this Constitution and for the purpose of carrying out 

the provisions of this article.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII  - COUNCIL ENACTMENTS

 
 Section 1. Ordinances. All final decisions on matters of general and permanent 

interest to members of the Reservation shall be embodied in ordinances, such as an 

enrollment ordinance or an election ordinance. Such enactments shall be available for 

inspection by members of the Band during normal office hours.

Section 2. Resolutions and Motions. All final decisions on matters of short term or 

one time interest where a formal expression is needed shall be embodied in 

resolutions. Other decisions of temporary nature or relating to particular individuals, 

officials or committees shall be put in the form of motions and noted in the minutes and 

shall be available for inspection by members of the rancheria during normal office 

hours.

Section 3. Codification of Ordinances and Resolutions. All ordinances and 

resolutions shall be dated and numbered, and shall include a certification showing the 

presence of a quorum and the number of members voting for or against the proposed 

enactment and shall be signed by the Chairperson and attested to by the council 

secretary.

Section 4. No enactment of the tribal council or general council shall have any validity 

or effect in the absence of a quorum of the membership thereof at a legally called 

session.

Section 5. [Intentionally Deleted] 

Section 6. Copies of all minutes, ordinances and resolutions shall be available for 

public inspection by members of the Band during normal office hours.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The tribal council shall exercise the powers and responsibilities provided by 

the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended by the Act 

of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378) subject to any limitations imposed upon such powers by 

the statutes and laws of the United States.

(a) 

To preserve and protect the Constitution of the Hopland Band of Pomo 

Indians.

(b) 

To consult, negotiate, contract or conclude agreements with Federal, 

tribal, state and local governments, private businesses and individuals which may affect 

the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians.

(c) 

To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees.

(d) 

To manage, lease or otherwise operate all unassigned Reservation 

property and to control the use of and development on assigned Reservation lands. 

Toward this end the tribal council shall within one (1) year of the effective date of this 

Constitution submit for ratification to a referendum vote of the registered voters of the 

Band a land use assignment ordinance.

(e) 

To acquire property and to accept gifts.

(f) 

To join and/or charter tribal housing authorities.

(g) 

To charter business enterprises, corporations and associations.

(h) 

To prescribe rules and regulations governing future membership, loss of 

membership and adoption of members and towards this end the Tribal Council shall 

within ten (10) days from the date this Constitution is approved by the general 

membership, enact a tribal enrollment ordinance.

(i) 

To administer Reservation assets and manage all economic affairs and 

enterprises of the Band.

(j) 

To promote the peace, safety, health and general welfare of the members 

of the Band.

(k) 

To promulgate and adopt ordinances as needed as long as they do not 

conflict with this Constitution.
 
 

(I) 

 
 To establish or join an Indian tribal judicial organization to deal with the 

Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 (P.L. 95-608) and any other legal matters which may 

come within its jurisdiction, under Federal law.

Section 2. The tribal council shall have all the appropriate powers necessary to

implement specific provisions of this Constitution and to effectively govern Reservation 

affairs. All powers heretofore vested in the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians but not 

specifically referred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged or lost by reason of their 

omission, but shall be reserved to and exercised by the general council.

Section 3. The tribal council shall not transfer trust land or interest therein out of Band 

ownership by any means unless prior to any such proposed transfer it is approved by 

the Secretary of the Interior and by a majority vote of the general council, provided that 

a quorum is present.

Section 4. Except as permitted below, the tribal council shall not pledge, mortgage, 

lease, grant licenses to use land (whether revocable or irrevocable) or otherwise 

encumber Reservation land or interest therein unless such action is approved by a vote 

of a majority of the general council voting in the questions, provided that a quorum is 

present.

Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 4 above, the tribal council may 

authorize the following encumbrances by a vote of a majority of the entire tribal council: 

(1) grants of permission to members of the Band and qualified non-members in 

accordance provisions of this Constitution, to use specific portions of Reservation land 

for residential, agricultural, commercial or industrial purposes and (2) grants of 

rights-of-way over Reservation land or interest therein for the purpose of providing
 
 

 
 
 municipal services, such as water, sewer disposal, electricity, telephone and roads to 

and for the benefit of Band members, or the heirs and descendants of Band members 

who hold a land use assignment or lease.

Section 5. The tribal council shall not develop on a commercial or industrial basis any 

natural resources on the Reservation without the consent of a majority vote of the 

general council, provided that a quorum is present.

Section 6. Sections 3, 4 and 5 of this article shall not be construed to deny to the tribal 

council its power and authority to regulate activities of Reservation land for the Band’s 

general welfare, including but not limited to zoning, the regulation of commercial 

ventures, fishing, hunting and other sports activities, and for the purpose of promoting 

the health, safety, and welfare of Band members and the conservation and protection 

of Reservation resources.
 
 

ARTICLE X - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Tribal Council Meetings.

(a) 

Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the tribal council shall be held 

on the third Saturday of each month at a place and time designated by the tribal 

council. The council secretary shall be responsible for telephoning or sending written 

notices to each member at least three (3) days in advance of the meeting if the regular 

date and place should have to be changed.

(b) 

Special Meetings. Special meetings of the tribal council may be called 

solely or shall be called by the chairperson upon the written request of at least four (4) 

council members provided that the reason for the meeting is stated in the request and 

that each member of the council is given at least forty-eight (48) hours advance notice 

of any special meeting. Upon refusal by the chairperson to call a special meeting within 

forty-eight (48) hours of the written request of the council, the four (4) members who 

requested the special meeting may proceed to call and conduct the special meeting 

provided that a quorum is present. Notice of the special meeting must be given at least 

twenty-four (24) hours prior to the special meeting.

(c) 

Quorum. A quorum of the tribal council shall consist of four (4) members 

of the tribal council. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is present.

Section 2. General Council Meetings.

(a) 

Annual Meetings. The general council shall meet at least annually at a 

time, place and date designated by the tribal council. The council secretary shall be 

responsible for sending written notices to the membership at least ten (10) days in 

advance of the scheduled meeting.

(b) 

Special Meetings. Special meetings of the general council may be called 

at the discretion of the chairperson, provided, that in each instance a written notice, 

including the purpose of the meeting, is given at least seven (7) days in advance of the 

scheduled meeting.

Special meetings of the general council shall be called by the chairperson upon 

receipt of a valid petition signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the qualified 

voters of the Band or by resolution of the tribal council, for the purpose of bringing 

special business or issues to the general council for discussion and/or enactment. The 

petition or resolution must state the purpose of the meeting. If, upon validation of the 

petition by the secretary, the chairperson does not call and notice the meeting within 

fifteen (15) days after validation, the next highest ranking officer shall exercise such 

authority, and upon failure of any of the tribal council members to call and notice the 

special meeting, the petitioner spokesperson shall proceed to call, notice and conduct 

the special meeting; provided, that a quorum shall be required to validate actions taken 

at such meetings. Special meetings of the general council shall not be cancelled after 

the seven (7) day notice is given.

(c) 

Quorum. A quorum of the general council shall consist of twenty-five 

percent (25%) of the general council. No business shall be conducted unless a quorum 

is present except that a quorum shall not be required for the election of Band officials.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Band shall enjoy without hindrance freedom of worship, 

conscience, speech, press, assembly and association.

Section 2. This Constitution shall not in anyway alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize 

the rights and privileges of the members of the Band as citizens of the United States. 

Section 3. The individual Property rights of any member of the Hopland Band of Pomo 

Indians shall not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this 

Constitution.

Section 4. Band members shall have the right to review all council records, including 

financial records at any reasonable time in accordance with the procedures established 

by the tribal council.

Section 5. In accordance with the Act of April 11, 1968, the Indian Civil Rights Act, 82 

Stat. 78, 25 U.S.C. Section 1301, 1303, the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians in 

exercising its powers of self-government shall not:

(a) 

Make or enforce any law prohibiting the full exercise of religion, or 

abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to 

assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances.

(b) 

Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, 

papers and effects against unreasonable search and seizure, nor issue warrants, but 

upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 

place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized.

(c) 

Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy.

(d) 

Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against

himself/herself.

(e) 

Take any private property for a public use without just compensation.

(f) 

Deny any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy trial, to be

informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witness 

against him/her, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his/her favor, 

and at his/her own expense, to have the assistance of counsel for his/her defense.

(g) 

Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual 

punishments, and in no event impose conviction of any one offense, any penalty or 

punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of one year or a fine of $5,000.00 or 

both.

(h) 

Deny to any member of the Band the equal protection of its laws or 

deprive any person of liberty or property without due process of law.

(i) 

(j) 

Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law.

Deny any person accused of any offense punishable by imprisonment the

right upon request to a trial by jury of not less than six (6) persons.

Section 6. Any provisions of Section 5 a-j that are inconsistent with the provisions of 

the Indian Civil Rights Act as amendment or repeal by Congress after passage of this 

Constitution shall be void.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Newly elected officers shall assume their respective office and duties 

immediately upon being elected.

Section 2. Chairperson:

(a) 

The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the tribal council. He/She 

may be bonded in an amount the tribal council designates by resolution.

(b) 

He/She shall execute on behalf of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians all 

contracts and other documents approved by the tribal council.

(c) 

He/She shall have general supervision of all other officers, delegates and 

committees of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians and see that their duties are properly 

performed, according to a personnel manual developed and approved by the tribal 

council.

(d)  When the tribal council is not in session, he/she shall be the official 

representative of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians.

(e) 

The chairperson shall appoint or remove all committee members, subject 

to approval of the tribal council.

(f) 

The chairperson shall vote only in case of a tie vote at the tribal council 

meeting except as otherwise provided in Section 1 of Article VI of this Constitution.

Section 3.  Vice-Chairperson:

The vice-chairperson, in the absence of the chairperson, shall have all the power 

and authority of the chairperson and may, if authorized by the chairperson, assist the 

chairperson in the performance of his/her duties.

Section 4.  Secretary:

(a) 

The secretary shall keep the minutes of all tribal council meetings.

(b) 

Shall certify the enactment of all notices required by the Constitution.

(c) 

Shall receive and validate all petitions provided for in the Constitution of 

the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians on behalf of the tribal council.

(d) 

Shall attend to the giving of notices required by the Constitution.

(e) 

At the expiration of his/her term in office, all records and papers in his/her 

possession shall be turned over to his/her successor or the tribal council.

Section 5.  Treasurer:

(a) 

Shall carry out the financial directives of the tribal council, receive monies 

of and for the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians and keep an accurate account of receipts 

and disbursement.

(b) 

Shall deposit funds in the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians’ account in a 

local bank selected by the tribal council.

(c) 

Shall give a financial report at all tribal council meetings and all financial 

records shall be available for inspection by officers of the tribal council and members of 

the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians.

(d) 

He/She may be bonded in the amount the tribal council designates by 

resolution.

(e) 

At the expiration of his/her term in office, all records and papers in his/her 

possession will be turned over to his/her successor or the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - JUDICIARY

 
 Section 1. The judicial power of the Band shall be vested in one (1) supreme court and 

in such other inferior courts as the tribal council may from time to time establish. The 

tribal court shall exercise jurisdiction over all cases and controversies within the Band's 

jurisdiction, in law and equity, whether civil or criminal in nature that arise under this 

Constitution, the laws of the Band or which is vested in the tribal courts by Federal law. 

Section 2. There shall be established one (1) Supreme Court which shall consist of a 

chief judge and two (2) associate judges, appointed-by the chairperson of the tribal 

council and confirmed by not less than a three-fourths (3/4) majority vote of the tribal 

council.

Section 3. The duties and procedures of the court shall be determined by the tribal 

council by a duly enacted ordinance in accordance with this Constitution. The 

ordinance shall be adopted by the tribal council within one year from the date that this 

Constitution is approved by a majority vote of the members of the Band voting at a 

special election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior.

Section 4. The tenure and salary of tribal judges shall be established by ordinance of 

the tribal council. No person shall be appointed to the office of tribal judge unless he or 

she is at least thirty (30) years of age and has never been convicted of a felony or, 

within one (1) year of receiving his or her appointment, of a misdemeanor under 

federal, state, or tribal law.

Section 5. In all criminal prosecutions, the accused shall enjoy the right to a speedy 

jury trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusations, to be confronted 

with the witnesses against him, the right of cross-examination, to have compulsory 

process for obtaining witnesses in his or her favor, and to have the assistance of an 

advocate for his or her defense admitted to practice before the tribal courts.

Section 6. The tribal council shall sit as a court of appeals whenever necessary and 

may within its discretion hear appeals from the supreme court at any regular or special 

meetings. Whenever the tribal council sits as an appellate court its decision shall be 

final and binding upon all parties to the suit and not subject to review. The procedures 

of the tribal council sitting as an appellate court shall be determined by the tribal council 

at any regular or special meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - AMENDMENT

 
 Section 1. This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters 

of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians voting in an election called for that purpose 

provided at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 

election.

Section 2. [Intentionally Deleted]
 
 

ARTICLE XV - REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Upon presentation to the tribal council of a valid petition signed by thirty 

percent (30%) of the qualified voters, the tribal council shall either (1) adopt the 

provisions of the petition by ordinance, resolution or other appropriate action: or (2) 

provide that the issue presented by the petition be voted on within thirty (30) days by 

secret ballot at a regular or special election. The tribal council shall abide by the vote of 

the majority of the voters in any such election, provided that at least thirty percent (30%) 

of those eligible to vote have voted.

Section 2. No referendum shall be conducted that will abrogate, modify or amend any 

properly approved contracts or agreements with third parties who are not members of 

the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this Constitution shall in the future be declared invalid by a court of 

competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the 

remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - ADOPTION

 
 Section 1. This Constitution, in order to be effective, must be adopted by a majority 

vote of the qualified voters of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians, voting at an election 

called for that purpose, provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to 

vote shall vote in such election.
 
  
 

ARTICLE XVIII - CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 [Intentionally Deleted] 
 

ARTICLE XIX - CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL


 
 [Intentionally Deleted]

RESOLUTION NO. 09-08-25 
 

A RESOLUTION OF THE ELECTION COMMITTEE OF THE HOPLAND BAND OF 

 
 POMO INDIANS CERTIFYING THE RESULTS OF THE AUGUST 22, 2009  
 
ELECTION TO AMEND THE HOPLAND BAND CONSTITUTION


WHEREAS the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians is a federally recognized Indian tribe 

possessing the powers of self-government;

WHEREAS the Tribe adopted a written Constitution in 1981 that has been recognized by 

the Bureau of Indian Affairs and followed by the membership;

WHEREAS the Tribe has delegated to an Election Committee matters related to tribal 

elections;

WHEREAS the Election Committee conducted an election on August 22, 2009 to amend 

the Tribe's Constitution;

WHEREAS Article III, Section 1 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that all children 

bom to any person of Hopland Band Indian descent listed on the 1961 distribution roll shall be a 
member of the Hopland Band and Amendment No. 1 on the official ballot proposed to amend 
this section to change “children bom" to “lineal descendants”;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 1 passed by a margin of 96 for and 15 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article V, Section 2 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that individuals 
convicted of a felony will not be permitted to run for tribal council and Amendment No. 2a on 
the official ballot proposed also precluding persons convicted of a crime of moral turpitude from 
serving on the tribal council;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 2a failed by a margin of 21 for and 90 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article V, Section 2 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that individuals 

convicted of a felony will not be permitted to run for tribal council and Amendment No. 2b on 
the official ballot proposed to amend this section to allow persons convicted of a felony to serve 
on the tribal council if the felony conviction has been expunged or pardoned;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 2b passed by a margin of 90 for and 21 

against with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article VI, Section 3 of the Tribe’s Constitution required the tribal council to 
declare vacant any position where the incumbent has been convicted while in office of a crime of 
dishonesty, has falsified his qualifications of a crime of dishonesty when being certified, or has 
missed three consecutive meetings and Amendment No. 3 on the official ballot proposed to 
amend this section by replacing crime involving dishonesty with felony or crime of moral 
turpitude and by clarifying that a person must miss three regular meetings;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 3 passed by a margin of 86 for and 25 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article VII, Section 1 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that the tribal 

council would fill any vacant seat by appointment and Amendment No. 4a on the official ballot 
proposed to clarify who may be appointed by providing that if the office is vacated in the first or 
second year of a term then a special election would be called but if the office is vacated in the 
third or fourth year of a term then the tribal council would appoint the person who received the 
most votes in the last election but did not win a seat;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 4a passed by a margin of 62 for and 49 

against with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article VII, Section 1 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that the tribal 

council would fill any vacant seat by appointment and Amendment No. 4b on the official ballot 
proposed to clarify who may be appointed by providing that the tribal council would appoint the 
person who received the most votes in the last election but did not win a seat;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 4b failed by a margin of 37 for and 74 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article VIII, Section 5 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that certain 

resolutions and ordinances had to be submitted to the Secretary of Interior within ten days and 
Amendment No. 5 proposed to delete this section;

WHEREAS this proposed .Amendment No. 5 passed by a margin of 84 for and 27 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article IX, Section 1(c) of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that the hiring 
of legal counsel would be subject to approval of the Secretary of Interior if required by federal 
law and Amendment No. 6 on the official ballot proposed to delete any requirement for such 
approval;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 6 passed by a margin of 75 for and 36 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article IX, Section 3 of the Tribe’s Constitution precluded the tribal council 
from transferring land out of Band ownership without Secretary of Interior approval and without 
a majority vote of the general council with at least forty-five persons of the general council 
voting and Amendment No. 7 on the official ballot proposed to clarify that this section applied to 
trust land and to change forty-five persons to quorum present;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 7 passed by a margin of 85 for and 26 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article IX, Section 4 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that the tribal 

council could not encumber Reservation land without Secretary of Interior approval and a 
majority vote of the general council provided that at least forty-five persons voted and 
Amendment No. 8 on the official ballot proposed to delete reference to the Secretary of Interior 
and change forty-five persons to quorum present;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 8 passed by a margin of 87 for and 24 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article IX, Section 5 of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that that tribal 

council could not develop tribal natural resources without the consent of a majority of the 
general council with at least forty-five persons voting and Amendment No. 9 on the official 
ballot proposed to change forty-five persons to quorum present;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 9 passed by a margin of 90 for and 21 against 

with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article X, Section 1(a) of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that regular 

tribal council meetings would be held on the second Sunday of each month and Amendment No. 
10 on the official ballot proposed changing the meeting date to the tliird Saturday of each month;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 10 passed by a margin of 62 for and 49 

against with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article XI, Section 5(g) of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that the tribal 

court could not punish a defendant greater than six months in jail or a fine of $500 and 
Amendment No. 11 on the official ballot proposed increasing those amounts to one year in jail 
and a fine of $5,000;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 11 passed by a margin of 60 for and 51 

against with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article XVIII of the Tribe’s Constitution provided that the constitution 

would be submitted to the BIA for approval and Amendment No. 12 on the official ballot 
proposed deleting this section;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 12 passed by a margin of 71 for and 40 

against with a quorum voting;

WHEREAS Article XIX of the Tribe’s Constitution provided for approval and signature 

by the BIA of the Tribe’s Constitution and Amendment No. 13 on the official ballot proposed 
deleting this section;

WHEREAS this proposed Amendment No. 13 passed by a margin of 75 for and 36 

against with a quorum voting.

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED that the Constitution of the Hopland Band 

of Pomo Indians is amended to read as follows with additions in italics and deletions in strike
out:

A. 

Article III, Section 1. “As used in this section the word ‘descent’ shall mean a person 
who is a direct lineal descendant of a person who is racially a Hopland Indian. The 
membership of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians shall consist of:

(a) 

All persons of Hopland Band Indian descent who were listed as distributes 

or dependent members of distributes in the Hopland Rancheria Plan for the Distribution 
of the Assets of the Hopland Reservation as approved by the Secretary on May 22, 1961.

(b) 

All children born to lineal descendants of any person of Hopland Band 

Indian descent whose name appears as a distribute or dependent member of a distribute 
on the Plan for the Distribution of Assets of the Hopland Reservation as approved by the 
Secretary on May 22, 1961.

(c) 

All persons of Hopland Band Indian descent who have ever leased, 

owned, received, or were assigned land on the Hopland Reservation.

(d) 

All other persons of Indian descent who can to the satisfaction of the 

general council demonstrate a substantial connection with the Hopland Reservation. The 
tribal council shall screen all applicants for acceptability under this clause and acceptance 
as members shall be subject to a majority vote of the general council at the next regularly 
scheduled meeting at which a quorum is present.”

Article V, Section 2. “A candidate for the position of tribal council must be a qualified 
voter of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians. Individuals convicted of a felony will not 
be permitted to serve on the run for tribal council unless the conviction has been 
expunged or pardoned. Residency shall not be a requirement for candidacy provided that 
the candidate is a resident of the State of California.”

Article VI, Section 3- “After due notice, it shall be the duty of the tribal council 
immediately to declare vacant any position and to promptly fill such vacancy in the 
manner provided in Article VII when it is determined that the incumbent:

(a) 
(b) 

Has resigned.
Has been convicted while in office of a felony or crime involving 

dishonesty of moral turpitude.

B. 

C. 

(c) 

Has falsified his or her affidavit of qualifications of a felony or crime 
involving dishonesty of moral turpitude when being certified as a candidate for tribal 
office.

(d) 

Has been absent, without being excused by the respective body, for more 

than three (3) consecutive regular meetings; provided that the loss of office for such 
reason shall not serve to deny a person from becoming a candidate for office in 
subsequent elections.

(e) 

Has ceased to reside physically in the State of California.”

D. 

Article VII, Section 1. “Any office which has been vacated, whether it be by removal, 
recall or forfeiture proceedings pursuant to Article VI of this Constitution, shall be filled 
by appointment of the tribal council at its next meeting as follows and such replacement 
shall serve the unexpired term of office:

(a) 

If the office is vacated during the first or second year of a term, then a

special election shall be called for the purpose of filling the vacated office.

(b) 

If the office is vacated during the third or fourth year of a term, then the

tribal council shall appoint the candidate who received the highest number of votes in the 
last tribal council election but did not win a seat on the tribal council so long as that 
candidate remains eligible to serve on the tribal council and agrees to fill the office.”

E. 

Article VIII, Section 5. “Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this 
Constitution or Federal law requires the approval of the-Secretary of Interior must-be 
received by the local Bureau Superintendent or his-designated representative no later thanten (10) days following its enactment in order to be considered for approval. It shall be

the duty of the Secretary's local representative to acknowledge receipt of such enactment,

and provided that such enactment is not disapproved by the Secretary's local 
representative it shall on the ninety-first (91st) day automatically become effective.”

F. 

G. 

H. 

Article IX, Section 1(c). “(c) To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing 
of fees to be subject to the-approval-of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative so long as such approval is required by Federal law."

Article IX. Section 3. “The tribal council shall not transfer trust land or interest therein 
out of Band ownership by any means unless prior to any such proposed transfer it is 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior and by a majority vote of the general council, 
provided that a quorum is present at least forty five (45) persons who are entitled to vote 
are present and vote in said election.”

Article IX, Section 4. “Except as permitted below by subsection (b) of this section, the
tribal council shall not pledge, mortgage, lease, grant licenses to use land (whether 
revocable or irrevocable) or otherwise encumber Reservation land or interest therein 
unless such action is approved by the Secretary of the Interior and by a vote of a majority of 
the general council voting on the question, provided that a quorum is present at least 
forty-five (45) persons who are entitled to vote are present and vote in said election."

I. 

J. 

K. 

Article IX, Section 5. “The tribal council shall not develop on a commercial or industrial 
basis any natural resources on the Reservation without the consent of a majority vote of 
the general council, provided that a quorum is present at least forty-five (45) persons who 
are entitled to vote are present and vote in said election.”

Article X, Section 1(a). “Regular meetings of the tribal council shall be held on a the 
second Sunday third Saturday of each month at a place and time designated by the tribal 
council. The council secretary shall be responsible for telephoning or sending written 
notices to each member at least three (3) days in advance of the meeting if the regular 
date and place should have to be changed.”

Article XI, Section 5(g). “(g) Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict 
cruel and unusual punishments, and in no event impose conviction of any one offense, 
any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of six (6) months one 
year or a fine of $500.00 $5,000.00 or both.”

L. Article XVIII. “Pursuant to an order issued on July 13, 1984, by _______, Deputy

Assistant Secretary Indian Affeirs (Operations), the Constitution of the Hopland Band 
of Pomo Indians of California was submitted for adoption to the qualified voters of the 
Rancheria and was on _____, 19__, duly __adopted __rejected by a vote of ____
for, and ____ against, in an election in which at least thirty percent of the ______
(number) entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June l8, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended by the Act of June 15, 
1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

-Election Board Member”

M. Article XIX. “I, __________, Deputy Assistant Secretary Indian Affairs

(Operations), by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended, and delegated to me by 209 D.M. 8.3, do 
hereby approve this Constitution of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians of California.

Deputy Assistant Secretary 
Indian Affairs (Operations)

Washington D.C.
Date: ____________”
 
 

 
 
 
 BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED that the Election Committee hereby certifies the results 

of the August 22, 2009 election as set forth above for the purpose of amending the Tribe’s 
Constitution; and

BE IT FINALLY RESOLVED that the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians shall take all 
necessary steps to ensure that the adopted amendments are immediately implemented and all 
necessary persons notified.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 We, Trina Vega, Committee Chair, and Alfredo “Joe” Carrillo, Committee Secretary, 
serving in our official capacities for the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee, 
hereby certify that the foregoing Resolution was enacted by a vote of__5__in favor,__ 0_  
against, and___0__abstaining, at a duly-noticed meeting of the Election Committee with a 
quorum present held on 08-25-2009 .

Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee 

Post Office Box 1810
Ukiah, California 95482


HOPLAND TRIBAL ELECTION COMMITTEE

COUNT AND TALLY OF BALLOTS

TOTAL NUMBER OF BALLOTS DISTRIBUTED 

TOTAL NUMBER OF VOTES CAST 

TOTAL VOTES CAST AT THE VOTING STATION 

TOTAL NUMBER OF VOTES CAST BY ABSENTEE BALLOTS 

TOTAL NUMBER OF SPOILED BALLOTS - ABSENTEE 

TOTAL NUMBER OF SPOILED VOTES CAST - WALK-IN 


128

114

48

66

09

05

CERTIFIED BY:
We, the undersigned members of the Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee , hereby 
certify that the above count and tally is true and correct, executed this day of August 22, 2009.
 
 

I I

 
 Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee
P.O. Box 1810
Ukiah. California 95482

Constitutional Amendment Election Results 
August 22, 2009
 
 

MEASURE

YES NO PASSED

 
 Lineal Descent
Crime of Moral Turpitude
Expungement
Fill Vacancy- Moral Turpitude
How to fill Vacancy

#1
#2a
#2b
#3
#4a
#4b Highest vote — seated
#5
#6
#7
#8
#9
#10 Monthly Meeting- Saturday
#11
Require penalty/punishment
Adoption Constitution
#12
Delete Secretary Interior
#13

Delete Secretary Interior
Delete Secretary Interior
Quorum-/!rust Land
Delete Secretary Interior
Quorum Present

96
21
90
86
62
37
84
75
85
87
90
62
60
71
75

15
90
21
25
49
74
27
36
26
24
21
49
51
40
36

yes
no
yes
yes
yes
no
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes
yes

Total Walk-in and Absentee Ballots

Amendment#1
Amendment #2a
Amendment #2b
Amendment #3
Amendment #4a
Amendment #4b

(no) 13 ******* Absentee (yes) 64  (no) 02
walk-in (yes) 32 
(no) 35 ******* Absentee (yes) 11  (no) 55
walk-in (yes) 10 
(no) 20 ******* Absentee (yes) 65  (no) 01
walk-in (yes) 25 
walk-in (yes) 27 (no) 18 ******* Absentee (yes) 59 (no) 07
(no) 18 ******* Absentee (yes) 35  (no)  31
walk-in (yes) 27 
walk-in (yes) 14 
(no) 31 ******* Absentee (yes) 23  (no) 43

Constitutional Amendment Election Results 
August 22, 2009

Amendment #5 walk-in (yes) 22 (no) 
Amendment #6 walk-in (yes) 24 (no) 
Amendment #7 walk-in (yes) 32 (no) 
Amendment #8 walk-in (yes) 25 (no) 
Amendment #9 walk-in (yes) 31 (no) 
Amendment #10 walk-in (yes) 20 (no) 
Amendment #11 walk-in (yes) 14 (no) 
Amendment #12 walk-in (yes) 21 (no) 
Amendment #13 walk-in (yes) 20 (no)

23 ******* Absentee (yes) 62 (no) 04
21 ******* Absentee (yes) 51 (no) 15 
13 ******* Absentee (yes) 53 (no) 13
20 ******* Absentee (yes) 62 (no) 04
14 ******* Absentee (yes) 59 (no) 07
25 ******* Absentee (yes) 42 (no) 24
31******* Absentee (yes) 46 (no) 20
25 ******* Absentee (yes) 50 (no) 15
25 ******* Absentee (yes) 55 (no) 11

Thank you for Voting

Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee 

Post Office Box 1810
Ukiah, California 95482


HOPLAND TRIBAL ELECTION COMMITTEE

COUNT AND TALLY OF BALLOTS

TOTAL NUMBER OF BALLOTS DISTRIBUTED 

TOTAL NUMBER OF VOTES CAST 

TOTAL VOTES CAST AT THE VOTING STATION 

TOTAL NUMBER OF VOTES CAST BY ABSENTEE BALLOTS 

TOTAL NUMBER OF SPOILED BALLOTS -ABSENTEE 

TOTAL NUMBER OF SPOILED VOTES CAST - WALK-IN 


128

114

48

66

09

05

CERTIFIED BY:
We, the undersigned members of the Hopland Band of Porno Indians Election Committee , hereby 
certify that/he above couru and tally is true and correct, executed this day of August 22,2009.
 
 

I

 
 Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee 
Official Tally Sheet - (continued) August 22, 2009

Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee 
Official Tally Sheet August 22, 2009

HoplandHand of&omo Indians Election Committee 
Officialdally Sheet August 22, 2009

Hopland Band of Pomo Indians Election Committee 
Official Tally Sheet - (continued) August 22, 2009

