 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

AMENDED 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE

HUALAPAI TRIBE OF THE 


 
 HUALAPAI RESERVATION. 
ARIZONA.

EFFECTIVE OCTOBER 22, 1955 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE


 
 WASHINGTON : 1957 
 

AMENDED

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 
HUALAPAI TRIBE OF THE HUALAPAI 
RESERVATION, ARIZONA


The Constitution and Bylaws of the Hualapai Tribe of the Huala

pai Reservation, Arizona, is amended as follows:

Preamble

We, the Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Indian Reservation, Ari
zona, in order to form a representative government, to develop our 
tribal lands and resources for ourselves and our children, to secure all 
rights guaranteed to us by treaties and by the Statutes of the United 
States, do establish this Constitution and Bylaws as a guide for the 
Hualapai Tribe.

Article I—Statement of Purpose

In our relation to the United States Government, a relation similar 
to that which a town or a county has to State and Federal Govern
ments, our own internal affairs shall be managed insofar as such man
agement does not conflict with the laws of the United States, by a gov
erning body which shall be known as the Hualapai Tribal Council.

Article II—Territory

Section 1. The authority of the Hualapai Tribe shall extend to 
all of the territory within the boundaries of the Hualapai Indian Res
ervation as established by Executive Orders of January 4, 1883, June 2, 
1911, and May 29, 1912, and lands which may be reestablished by prior 
rights and treaties, and to such other lands as the United States may 
acquire for the benefit of the Tribe or the Tribe may acquire for itself.

Article III—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Hualapai Tribe shall consist of:
(a)  All persons who are members of the Tribe on the date when this 

revised Constitution is finally approved.

(b)  Any child of one-fourth degree or more of Hualapai Indian 
blood who is born to a resident member after the date this Consti
tution is approved, and any child of one-fourth degree or more of 
 
 

 
 
 Hualapai Indian blood born to a non-resident member, after the date 
this Constitution is approved, provided that a declaration of in
tention to maintain membership of such non-resident child is sub
mitted to the Hualapai Tribal Council within one year from the 
date of birth of such child. The method of declaring intention of 
membership shall be determined by ordinance of the Council.

Sec. 2. The Council shall have the power to pass ordinances, sub
ject to review by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized repre
sentative, governing future membership, loss of membership, and the 
adoption of members by the Hualapai Tribe.

Article IV—Governing Body 

Section 1. The governing body of the Hualapai Tribe shall be 
known as the Hualapai Tribal Council and shall consist of nine (9) 
members.

Sec. 2. The first election of councilmen under this revised Consti
tution shall be held on the next regular election date following the 
adoption and approval of this revised Constitution and Bylaws. In 
the first election the three (3) candidates receiving the highest num
ber of votes shall hold office for three years. The three (3) candidates 
receiving the second number of highest votes shall hold office for two 
years, and three (3) candidates who receive the third highest number 
of votes shall hold office for a period of one year. In each regular elec
tion thereafter, three (3) candidates shall be elected and shall hold of
fice for a term of three years.

Sec. 3. A hereditary chief of the Tribe may be selected by the sub
chiefs of the various recognized bands. The chief so selected shall serve 
as a tenth member of the Council and shall have the same duties and 
privileges as other members of the Council. His term of office shall con
tinue until he may be recalled by the subchiefs, or until his death or 
voluntary resignation. His successor may be chosen in the same 
manner.

Sec. 4. A Council Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall be elected 
from the Council membership by the qualified voters of the Tribe at 
the regular election meetings following the announcement of results 
of the election of council members. The officers so elected shall hold 
such office for a term of two years, except when term of council mem
ber is less than two years then the term of the elected officer shall not 
exceed that of the term as council member. When the term of one of 
the officers is terminated before he has served two years due to termina
tion of council membership, or for other reasons, his successor will be 
chosen at the next general tribal meeting by the qualified voters, the 
person receiving the highest number of votes will fill the vacant position 

for the unexpired term. Either the Chairman or Vice-Chairman 

may be reelected to successive terms.

Sec. 5. The Council shall choose a Secretary and a Treasurer from 
within or without the tribal membership. The Council may also choose 
such committees from within or without its membership as may be 
deemed necessary.

Sec. 6. The Council shall have the power to district the Reservation 
and to apportion the representation, subject to a vote of the people, 
whenever such action is deemed advisable by the Council.

Sec. 7. Members of the Council shall take office on the first day of 

the first month after their election.

Article V—Elections

Section 1. General elections to vote for councilmen shall be held 
every year on the first Saturday in June. The voting place shall be 
at Peach Springs, Arizona.

Sec. 2. Special elections shall be held upon call by the Tribal Coun
cil as provided in Article IX, and notice of them shall be given as in the 
case of general or regular elections. In case of special election, the 
Council shall specify the voting places.

Sec. 3. All elections shall be announced by special notice posted at 
least thirty days before the election at the voting places and other pub
lic places.

Sec. 4. Nominations shall be made at the annual general meeting 

of the Hualapai Tribe.

Sec. 5. All elections shall be by written ballot. The Council shall 
have power to prescribe ordinances governing the casting and canvass
ing of ballots, and other necessary details of election procedures cov
ering election of councilmen and referendum elections. All tribal 
members, male or female, twenty-one years of age or over, shall be en
titled to vote in any election.

Article VI—Powers of the Council

Section 1. The Hualapai Tribal Council shall have the following 

powers:

(a)  To represent the Tribe and act in all matters that concern the 
welfare of the Tribe, and to make decisions not inconsistent with or 
contrary to this Constitution and Bylaws or the Constitution and 
Statutes of the United States.

(b)  To negotiate and make contracts with the Federal, State and 

local governments.

(c)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior or his representative on 
all activities that may affect the Hualapai Reservation, and on all ap
propriation estimates and Federal projects for the benefit of the Tribe 
before such estimates and projects are submitted to the Bureau of the 
Budget and to Congress.

(d)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees 
to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, so long 
as such approval is required by Federal law.

(e)  To veto the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 
lands, tribal funds or other tribal assets that may be authorized by any 
agency or employee of the Government.

(f)  To protect and preserve the wildlife and natural resources of 

the Tribe; to regulate hunting and fishing on the Reservation.

(g)  To cultivate Indian arts, crafts and cultures.
(h)  To administer charity.
(i)  To regulate the use and disposition of tribal property.
(j)  To negotiate and issue leases for business and home site pur
poses; to regulate by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the licensing of non-members doing business within 
the reservation.

(k)  To grant or lease any portion of the Reservation, or grant the 
right to the use of lands or other assets, or to grant or relinquish water 
or mineral rights, or other natural or fiscal assets, or any other 
assets whatsoever of the Hualapai Reservation; provided, that all other 
sales or exchange of tribal lands shall be reserved to the sanction of 
the Tribe.

(1)  To manage all tribal economic affairs and enterprises in ac

cordance with the terms of the Corporate Charter of the Tribe.

(m)  To levy and collect taxes.
(n)  To appropriate and regulate the use of tribal funds.
(o)  To enact ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior, establishing and governing tribal courts and law enforcement 
on the Reservation; regulating domestic relations of members of the 
Tribe, but all marriages shall be in accordance with State laws; 
providing for appointment of guardians for minors and mental in
competents; regulating the inheritance of real and personal prop
erty of members of the Tribe within the Reservation; and providing 
for the removal or exclusion from the Reservation of any non-mem
ber of the Tribe whose presence may be injurious to the people of 
the Reservation.

(p)  To enact ordinances governing the activities of voluntary as
sociations consisting of members of the Tribe organized for purposes 
of cooperation or other purposes.

(q)  To regulate its own procedures; to appoint subordinate com
mittees, commissions, boards, tribal officials and employees not other
wise provided for in this Constitution and Bylaws, and to prescribe 
their salaries, tenure and duties; to charter and to regulate subor
dinate organizations for economic and other purposes.

(r)  The Council may exercise such further powers as may be 
delegated to the Hualapai Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior or 
by any other qualified official or agency of the Government.

(s)  The foregoing enumeration of powers shall not be construed 
to limit the powers of the Hualapai Tribe, and such powers may 
be exercised through the adoption of appropriate bylaws or consti
tutional amendments.

Article VII—Review by the Secretary

Any resolution or ordinance which, by the terms of this Constitu
tion, is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be 
presented to the administrative officer in charge of the Reservation 
who shall, within 15 days of receipt, approve or disapprove the same.
If the administrative officer in charge of the Reservation shall 
approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become ef
fective, but he shall submit a copy of the same, bearing his endorse
ment, to the Secretary of the Interior who may, within ninety days 
from the date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution 
for any cause by notifying the Council of such rescission. If the 
Secretary shall fail to act within the 90-day period, the ordinance or 
resolution shall remain in effect as of the date of the Superintendent’s 
approval.

If the administrative officer in charge of the Reservation shall re
fuse to approve any resolution or ordinance submitted to him within 
15 days after receipt by him, he shall advise the Council of his rea
sons therefor. If those reasons appear insufficient to the Council, it 
may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the 
Secretary of the Interior who may, within ninety days from the date 
of its submission to him, approve the same in writing, whereupon 
the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

Article VIII—Rights of Members

Section 1. All members of the Hualapai Tribe shall be accorded 
equal political rights and equal opportunities to participate in the 
economic resources and activities of the Tribe, and no person shall 
be denied freedom of conscience, speech, association or assembly, or 
the right to petition for the redress of grievances.

Article IX—Removal and Resignation From Office

Section 1. If a member of the Council fails or refuses to attend 
two regular meetings in succession, unless excused due to illness or 
other causes for which he cannot be held responsible, or shall be con
victed of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving moral integrity, 
his office shall be declared forfeited by a resolution of the Council, 
and a special election called by the Council shall be held to replace him.
Sec. 2. If a member of the Council shall fail in the performance 
of the duties assigned him, he may be subject to recall. The Council 
may by a two-thirds vote, after affording the accused member a fair 
opportunity to be heard in his own defense, require such member to 
stand for re-election in a special election called for that purpose.

Sec. 3. Any councilman resigning or taken by death out of office 
shall be replaced at the next general election of councilmen. If so 
desired, the Council may fill such position by a majority vote until the 
time of the said election.

Sec. 4. The members of the Tribe shall have the power to remove 
or reinstate any member of the Hualapai Tribal Council by filing a 
petition with the Secretary of the Tribal Council, signed by at least 
seventy-five qualified voters, asking for the removal or reinstatement 
of said member of the Tribal Council: Provided, That no such person 
may be removed or reinstated except at a special election which shall 
be held within 30 days after the filing of the petition.

Article X—Reservation Land

Section 1. The Reservation land shall as a whole remain tribal 
property and shall not be divided by allotment of any parts to in
dividuals or groups of individuals as private property that could be 
sold at will: but assignment of land for private use may be made by 
the Council in conformity with ordinances which may be adopted on 
this subject, provided the rights of the members of the Tribe be not 
violated.

Article XI—Referendum

Section 1. Upon a petition of at least thirty percent of the eligible 
voters of the Tribe, or upon the request of the majority of the mem
bers of the Tribal Council, any enacted or proposed ordinance or reso
lution of the Tribal Council shall be submitted by the Council to 
popular referendum and the vote of the majority of the qualified 
voters in such referendum shall decide whether the ordinance or 
resolution shall thereafter be in effect, provided, that thirty percent 
or more of the eligible voters shall vote in such referendum, and pro
vided that such action is favorably reviewed by the Secretary of the 
Interior where Secretarial review is required.

Article XII—Amendments

Section 1. This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by 
a majority vote of qualified voters of the Tribe voting at an election 
called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that 
at least thirty percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such elec
tion; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to 
call an election on any proposed amendment at the request of the 
Council, or upon presentation of a petition signed by one-third of 
the qualified voters of the Tribe.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE HUALAPAI TRIBE OF 
ARIZONA
 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman of the Council shall preside over all 
meetings of the Council, shall perform all duties of a Chairman and 
exercise any authority given him specifically by the Council or by a 
general meeting of the Tribe. The Chairman shall have power to 
vote.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman, in the absence of the regular Chair
man, shall preside and shall have all powers, privileges and duties of 
the Chairman. He shall have power to vote at any meeting.

Sec. 3. The Secretary shall conduct all tribal correspondence and 
it shall be his duty to submit promptly to the administrative officer 
in charge of the Reservation and other appropriate offices of the 
Bureau of Indian Affairs, copies of all minutes of regular and special 
meetings of the Council as well as copies of all resolutions and ordi
nances adopted by the Council. If the Secretary is a member of the 
Council he shall have power to vote at any meeting.

Sec. 4. The duties of the Treasurer shall be as follows:
(a)  He shall accept, receipt for, keep and safeguard all funds in the 
custody of the Council. He shall deposit all such funds as directed by 
the Hualapai Council and shall keep accurate record of such funds 
and shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount and 
nature of all funds in his custody to the Council at regular meetings 
and at such other times as requested by the Council. He shall not pay 
or disburse any funds in custody of the Council except when properly 
authorized to do so by the Council. 

.

(b) The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least 
once a year by a competent auditor employed by the Council, and at 
such other times as the Council may direct.

(c)  The Treasurer shall be required to give a surety bond satis
factory to the Council and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his 
authorized representative.

(d)  All checks shall be signed by the Treasurer or by some other 

person designated by the Council.

(e)  If the Treasurer is a member of the Council he shall have the 

power to vote at any meeting.

Article II—Qualifications of Councilmen

Section 1. Any member of the Tribe shall be qualified to be a 
candidate for election to the Council who has reached the age of 
twenty-five years and who is a resident of the Reservation. No person 
who has been convicted of a felony, or who within the last year pre
ceding the election has been convicted of a crime involving moral 
integrity shall be eligible to hold office in the Council. The following 
crimes and no others shall be considered crimes involving moral in
tegrity: adultery, bribery, embezzlement, extortion, fraud, forgery, 
misbranding, perjury, and theft.

Article III—Meetings of the Council

Section 1. At the first meeting of the Council after a regular elec
tion, the Council shall see that all members have a correct and clear 
understanding of the Constitution and Bylaws and the management of 
the tribal and Reservation affairs, as well as the rules for conduct of 
their own body.

Sec. 2. Regular meetings of the Council shall be held on the first 
Saturday of each month at 9:00 o’clock A. M. at Peach Springs, 
Arizona, or at such other place as may be designated by the Chairman. 
In case the time of the regular Council meeting on the first Saturday of 
each month should conflict with a National, State, or Tribal election, 
or shall fall on a holiday, the meeting shall be held on the following 
Saturday.

Sec. 3. Special meetings of the Council may be called by the Chair
man, or the Chairman shall call a special meeting upon the written 
request of three or more members of the Council.

Sec. 4. In the conduct of business, recognized rules of order shall 
apply. Voting at the Council meetings may be by voice, but at the 
discretion of the Chairman, or upon the request of any two members 
of the Council, a secret vote shall be taken.

Sec. 5. Matters of business for the Council shall be decided by a 
majority vote. A quorum (a number competent to transact business) of 
the Council shall be if six or more members are present.

Sec. 6. In any matter coming before the Council which involves 
the Indian Bureau or any person or company, no member of the Coun
cil that may be permanently connected with the party so involved shall 
be permitted to vote without a special consent of the remaining mem
bers of the Council.

Article IV—Meeting of the Tribe

Section 1. The Council may from time to time call meetings of all 
voters of the Tribe to lay before them such matters as may come before 
such a general meeting. A general tribal meeting shall be held at least 
once a year at which meeting the nomination and election of council
men shall be held.

Article V—Law and Order

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the Council to provide through 
the necessary bylaws or ordinances for the establishment of a tribal 
court upon the Reservation.

Sec. 2. This court shall have jurisdiction of such petty offenses 
not falling within the exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal or State 
courts, as may be enumerated in the ordinances or bylaws of the Tribe.
Sec. 3. This court shall have jurisdiction over all disputes between 

Indians on the Reservation.

Sec. 4. The duties, jurisdiction, and procedure of this court shall 

be more fully set forth by bylaws or ordinances.

Sec. 5. The judges of this court shall be appointed by the Tribal 

Council.

Sec. 6. It shall be the duty of the Council to establish by ordi
nances a tribal police force. Such ordinances shall outline in detail 
the authority and duties of such tribal police force and the manner 
in which such police force shall function. Members of the police force 
shall be selected by the Council.

Article VI—Federal Employees

Section 1. The Council may request the administrative officer in 
charge of the Reservation to furnish it with the names of all civil 
service probationers or temporary employees under civil service regu
lations on the Hualapai Reservation that are nearing the end of their 
probation periods, and may advise with the administrative officer in 
the matter of their being given permanent positions as civil service 
employees on the Reservation.

Article VII—Adoption
Section 1. This revised Constitution and Bylaws, when adopted 
by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Hualapai Tribe of 
 
 

 
 
 the Hualapai Reservation, voting at a special election called by the 
Secretary of the Interior, in which at least thirty percent of those en
titled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the In
terior for his approval, and shall be in force from the date of such 
approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION
 
 Pursuant to an order approved August 23, 1955, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached amended Constitution and By
laws was submitted for adoption to the qualified members of the 
Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Reservation, Arizona, and was on 
October 22, 1955, duly adopted by a vote of 90 for and 17 against, in 
an election in which at least thirty percent of those entitled to vote cast 
their ballots, in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganiza
tion Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 
June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Rupert Parker
President, Hualapai Tribal Council 
Marjorie Querta
Secretary, Hualapai Tribal Council 

Administrative Officer in Charge, Hualapai Reservation

Austin F. Ladd

I, Wesley A. D’Ewart, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 18,1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached amended Constitution and Bylaws of the Hualapai Tribe 
of the Hualapai Reservation in Arizona, to be effective as of October 
22, 1955, the date on which it was adopted by the tribal members.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Depart
ment of the Interior or by the Bureau of Indian Affairs, so far as 
they may be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said 
amended Constitution and Bylaws, are hereby declared inapplicable 
to the Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Reservation in Arizona.

All officers and employees of the Department of the Interior are 
ordered to abide by the provisions of the said amended Constitution 
and Bylaws.
Approved recommended: December 29, 1955

Glenn L. Emmons
Commissioner of Indian Affairs

NTbsley A. D’Ewart
Assistant Secretary of the Interior 

Washington, D. C., January 16, 1956

(seal)

