 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
 

OF THE

HUALAPAI TRIBE 
OF THE HUALAPAI RESERVATION 
ARIZONA

 
 APPROVED DECEMBER 17, 1938


UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

HUALAPAI TRIBE
OF THEHUALAPAI RESERVATION 
ARIZONA


 
  
  
 APPROVED DECEMBER 17, 1938 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1989 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE HUALAPAI TRIBE 
OF THE HUALAPAI RESERVATION, ARIZONA

PREAMBLE


We, the Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai (Walapai) Indian Res
ervation, Arizona, in order to form a representative government, 
to develop our tribal lands and resources for ourselves and our 
children, to provide better homes within the reservation, to secure 
all rights guaranteed to us by treaties and by the statutes of the 
United States, do establish this Constitution and By-laws as a guide 
for the Hualapai Tribe.

Article I—Territory

The authority of the Hualapai Tribe shall extend to all of the 
territory within the boundaries of the Hualapai (Walapai) Indian 
Reservation as established by Executive Orders of January 4, 1883, 
June 2, 1911, and May 29, 1912, and lands which may be reestab
lished by prior rights and treaties, and to such other lands as the 
United States may acquire for the benefit of the Tribe or the Tribe 
may acquire for itself.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Hualapai Tribe shall consist 

of:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the offi
cial census roll of the Hualapai Tribe as of January 1, 1938: Pro
vided, That within one year after the adoption and approval of 
this Constitution, corrections may be made in said roll by the Tribal 
Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(b) All children born to any member of the Tribe after January 

1, 1938, who shall have one-half degree or more of Indian blood.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall have power to make ordinances, 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing future 
membership and the adoption of new members.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Hualapai Tribe shall be 
known as the Hualapai Tribal Council and shall consist of nine 
members, one of whom shall be an hereditary chief of the Tribe, 
selected by the subchiefs of the various recognized bands. The chief 
so selected as a member of the Council shall have the same duties 
and privileges as other members of the Council. His term of office 
shall continue until he may be recalled by the subchiefs, or until his

death or voluntary resignation. His successor may be chosen in the 
same manner.

Sec. 2. The Council shall choose from its membership, a Presi
dent and a Vice-President, and from within or without its member
ship, a Secretary and a Treasurer, and such other officers and 
committees as may be deemed necessary.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council shall have power to district the Res
ervation and to apportion representation, subject to a vote of the 
people, whenever such action is deemed advisable by the Council.

Sec. 4. The members of the Tribal Council shall be qualified 
voters 25 years of age or over, and members of the Hualapai Tribe 
and residents of the Reservation.

Article IV—Nominations and Elections

Section 1. The first election of the Tribal Council shall be held 
within 30 days after the adoption and approval of this Constitution 
and By-laws by the Hualapai Tribe, and shall be called and super
vised by the present Tribal Council in co-operation with the Super
intendent of the Reservation.

Sec. 2. At the first election nominations for elective members of 
the Hualapai Tribal Council shall be made at a General Council 
called for that purpose. Persons nominated shall appear in front 
of the General Council and then be seated, after which voting shall 
take place. Voting shall be by secret ballot. The members elected 
shall hold office until their successors are chosen in June, as provided 
in section 3.

Sec. 3. On the first Saturday in June 1939, two elective members 
of the Council shall be elected for one year; three for two years; 
and three for three years. Thereafter each elective member shall 
hold office for a term of three years beginning with the expiration 
of the term of his predecessor in office. Elections shall be held 
annually on the first Saturday in June.

Sec. 4. Any resident member, male or female, 21 years of age or 

over, shall be entitled to vote at any election.

Sec. 5. The Tribal Council, or an election board appointed by 
the Council, shall provide rules governing elections and shall desig
nate polling places and election officials.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a member of the Hualapai Tribal Council shall die, 
resign, permanently leave the Reservation, or shall be found guilty 
of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty, or be recalled, 
the Council shall declare the position vacant and shall call an 
election to fill the unexpired term.

Sec. 2. The Hualapai Tribal Council may, by an affirmative vote 
of two thirds of its members, expel any member for gross miscon
duct or neglect of duty. Any member of the Council may similarly 
be removed from office by a two-thirds vote of the Council, if he is 
absent from the Reservation more than one year without prior ap
proval of the Council; but no member of the Council may be re
moved from office under this section except after reasonable notice

of any charges against him and after an open hearing before the 
Council on such charges.

Sec. 3. The members of the Tribe shall have the power to remove 
or reinstate any member of the Hualapai Tribal Council by filing a 
petition with the Secretary of the Tribal Council, signed by at least 
seventy-five qualified voters, asking for the removal or reinstatement 
of said member of the Tribal Council: Provided, That no such per
son may be removed or reinstated except at a special election which 
shall be held within 30 days after the filing of the petition.

Article VI—Powers of the Tribal Council

Section 1. The Hualapai Tribal Council shall have the following 

powers:

(a) To negotiate with the Federal, State, or local governments, 
and to advise and consult with representatives of the Interior De
partment on all activities that may affect the reservation, and in re
gard to all appropriation estimates and Federal projects for the 
benefit of the Tribe before such estimates or projects are submitted 
to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(b)  To veto the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 
lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets, that may be author
ized by any agency of government without the consent of the tribe; 
and any sale, grant, or lease of any portion of the reservation, or 
the grant of any rights to the use of lands or other assets, or the 
grant or relinquishment of any water or mineral rights, or other 
natural or fiscal assets, or any other assets whatsoever of the Hual
apai Reservation, are hereby reserved to the sanction of the Tribe.
(c) To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the Tribe and its members, the choice of counsel and 
the fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior.

(d) To regulate the uses and disposition of tribal property and 
funds; to protect and preserve the wild life and natural resources of 
the Tribe; to cultivate Indian arts, crafts, and culture; to administer 
charity; and to make ordinances covering the leasing of tribal lands 
and assignments made upon tribal lands, all action of the Tribal 
Council with respect to such lands to be in conformity with Depart
mental regulations for the protection of Indian range and timber 
resources.

(e) To deposit all Tribal Council Funds to the credit of the 
Hualapai Tribe in an Individual Indian Moneys Account, Hualapai 
Tribe of the Truxton Canon Agency, such funds to be expended only 
upon the recommendation of the Tribal Council in accordance with 
a budget having prior approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(f) To represent the tribe and to act in all matters that concern 
the welfare of the Tribe, and to make decisions not inconsistent with 
or contrary to this Constitution and By-laws or the Constitution and 
Statutes of the United States.

(g) To regulate by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the licensing of nonmembers doing business within 
the Reservation.

(h) To regulate hunting and fishing on the Reservation, and to 

grant licenses and permits under such regulations.

(i)  To provide by ordinance, subject to the approval by the Secre
tary of the Interior, for the removal or exclusion from the Reser
vation of any nonmember whose presence may be injurious to mem
bers of the Tribe.

(j)  To provide ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior, governing law enforcement on the Reservation and 
providing for the establishment of a Tribal Court or Courts for the 
trial and punishment of offenders against such ordinances, but Fed
eral and State courts will have jurisdiction over all other cases 
where Federal or State laws shall apply.

(k) To regulate domestic relations of members of the Tribe in 

accordance with State laws.

(l)  To regulate by ordinance the inheritance of real and personal 

property of members within the Reservation.

(m) To regulate its own procedures; to appoint subordinate 
boards, tribal officials and employees not otherwise provided for in 
this Constitution, and to prescribe their salaries, tenure and duties; 
to charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, and to 
regulate such organizations by ordinances: Provided, That any or
dinance affecting organizations borrowing money from the Federal 
Government shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior.

Sec. 2. The Hualapai Tribal Council may exercise such further 
powers as may in the future be delegated to it by the Secretary of 
the Interior or by any other authorized official or agency of gov
ernment, and may exercise any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Hualapai Tribe, but not expressly referred to in this Con
stitution.

Sec. 3. Manner of Review.—Any ordinance or resolution which by 
the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Res
ervation who shall, within ten days thereafter, approve or disap
prove the same. If he approves any ordinance or resolution, it shall 
thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit 
a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the 
Interior who may, within 90 days from the date of enactment, re
scind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause by notifying the 
Tribal Council of his action. If the Superintendent refuses to ap
prove any ordinance or resolution submitted to him within ten days 
after its enactment, he shall advise the Tribal Council of his reasons. 
The Tribal Council may by a majority vote refer the ordinance or 
resolution to the Secretary of the Interior who may within 90 days 
from its enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the 
said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

Article VII—Referendum

Upon a petition of at least fifty per cent of the eligible voters of 
the Hualapai Tribe, or upon the request of the majority of the 
members of the Tribal Council, any enacted or proposed ordinance 
or resolution of the Tribal Council shall be submitted to popular 
referendum and the vote of the majority of the qualified voters in 
such referendum shall decide whether the ordinance or resolution

shall thereafter be in effect: Provided, That one-half or more of the 
eligible voters shall vote in such referendum.

Article VIII—Lands

The reservation land shall continue to remain tribal property and 
shall never be allotted to individuals, but assignments of land for 
private use may be made by the Hualapai Tribal Council in con
formity with ordinances and forms enacted and adopted by the 
Tribal Council on the use and assignment of tribal land which shall 
be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior. The right of 
occupancy of long established allocations or dwelling places and im
provements made by individuals or families on tribal lands shall 
be confirmed by the Tribal Council through appropriate ordinances.

Article IX—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be proposed 
by a majority vote of the Hualapai Tribal Council and may be rati
fied and approved in the same manner as this Constitution and 
By-laws.

BY-LAWS OF THE HUALAPAI TRIBE OF THE HUALAPAI RESERVATION.
 
 
ARIZONA

 
 Article L—Duties of Officers

Section 1. President.—The President shall preside over all meet
ings of the Tribal Council and general meetings of the Tribe, shall 
perform the usual duties of a President, and exercise any authority 
delegated to him by the Council.

Sec. 2. Vice-President.—The Vice-President shall assist the Presi
dent when called upon to do so and in the absence of the President 
he shall preside. When so presiding, he shall have all the rights, 
privileges and duties as well as the responsibilities of the President.
Sec. 3. Secretary.—The Secretary shall conduct all tribal corre
spondence and shall keep an accurate record of all matters trans
acted at Council meetings. It shall be his duty to submit promptly 
to the Superintendent of the reservation copies of all minutes of 
regular and special meetings of the Council.

Sec. 4. Treasurer.—The Treasurer shall accept, receive, receipt for, 
preserve and safeguard all funds in the custody of the Tribal Coun
cil. He shall deposit all funds in such depository as the Council 
shall direct and shall make and preserve a faithful record of such 
funds and shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the 
amount and nature of all funds in his possession and custody, at 
such times as requested by the Tribal Council. He shall not pay 
out or disburse any funds in his possession or custody, except in 
accordance with a resolution duly passed by the Council. The books 
and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least once each 
year by a competent auditor employed by the Council and at such 
other times as the Council or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
may direct. The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satis
factory to the Tribal Council and to the Commissioner of Indian

Affairs. Until the Treasurer is bonded, the Tribal Council may make 
such provision for the custody and disbursement of funds as shall 
guarantee their safety and proper disbursement and use.

Article II—Meetings of the Council

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall hold regular meetings on 
the first Saturday of each month at 9:00 o’clock in the morning at 
the Truxton Canon Agency or other designated place. Special 
meetings of the Tribal Council or of the Tribe may be called by the 
President or any three or more members of the Council.

Sec. 2. Six or more members of the Council must be present at 
any regular or special meeting in order to transact tribal business.
Sec. 3. A General Tribal meeting shall be held once a year at the 
time of the election of councilmen in June. At this meeting the 
Tribal Council shall make a report of its work during the preceding 
year just passed, and may transact any other business of general 
interest to the Tribe.

Article III—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Res
ervation voting at a special election called by the Secretary of the 
Interior, in which at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall 
vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his ap
proval, and shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 26, 1938, by the Acting 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws 
was submitted for ratification to the adult Indians of the Hualapai 
Reservation at Truxton Canon, Arizona, and was on November 19, 
1938, duly adopted by a vote of 62 for and 34 against, in an election 
in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, 
in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 
1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Hualapai Tribal Council.

Charles McGee, 

J. H. CRICKENBERGER,

Acting Supt., Truxton Canon Agency.

I, Harry Slattery, Acting Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Hualapai Tribe of the 
Hualapai Reservation in Arizona.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
and By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Hualapai Tribe 
of the Hualapai Reservation in Arizona.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended December 13, 1938.

William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., December 17, 1938.

Harry Slattery,

Acting Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]
 
 

AMENDMENT CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 
HUALAPAI TRIBE OF THE HUALAPAI RESERVATION, 
ARIZONA

 
 Amendment I.

Article VI, Section 1 (b) of the Hualapai Tribal Constitution shall 

be amended to read as follows:

“(b) To veto the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 
lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets, that may be authorized 
by any agency of government without the consent of the tribe; and to 
grant or lease any portion of the reservation, or grant the right to the 
use of lands or other assets, or to grant or relinquish water or mineral 
rights, or other natural or fiscal assets, or any other assets whatsoever 
of the Hualapai Reservation; all other sales or exchange of tribal 
lands shall be reserved to the sanction of the Tribe.”
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved May 25, 1948, by the Assistant Sec
retary of the Interior, the attached Amendment I to the Constitution 
and By-laws of the Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Reservation, 
Arizona, was submitted for ratification to the Indians of the Hualapai 
Reservation and was on June 17, 1948, duly adopted by a vote of 
for, and 16 against, in an election in which over thirty percent of 
1 hose entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with Section 16 
of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Wilson Honga, 

Chairman, Hualapai Council.

Jacob Honga, 

Secretary, Hualapai Council.

Thomas H. Dodge,

Superintendent, Truxton Canon Agency.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, William E. Warne, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Amendment I to the Constitution and By-laws of the 
Hualapai Tribe of the Hualapai Reservation, Arizona.

Approval recommended: September 15, 1948.
William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

[seal] William E. Warne, 
Assistant Secretary of the Interior.

Washington. D. C., September 20, 1948.

