CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF IOWA TRIBE OF KANSAS AND NEBRASKA 
(As amended September 28, 2013)

Preamble

We, the members of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, initially organized under a constitution and 
bylaws approved February 26, 1937, pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), do hereby establish this constitution and bylaws under the authority of the IRA in order to 
form a more functional government, develop our tribal resources and promote the economic and social 
welfare of ourselves and our descendants.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Iowa Tribe shall extend to the territory within the confines of the Iowa 
Reservation as defined in the Treaty of March 6, 1861, and to such other lands as may be hereafter 
added thereto.

Section 1. The membership of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall consist of the following:
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 a.  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census roll of the tribe as of 
January 1,1937; provided that the roll may be corrected at any time by the General Council, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

b.  All lineal descendants of persons enrolled under Section 1 (a), one of those parents is an 
enrolled member of the tribe and; provided such descendant possesses Iowa of Kansas and 
Nebraska Indian blood.

Section 2. Persons who are enrolled as members of another Indian tribe shall not be eligible for 
enrollment with the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska if they have, by virtue of enrollment as members 
of another Indian tribe, shared in assets of that tribe, including land or monetary benefits. Persons who 
are enrolled as members of another Indian tribe and have not shared in tribal assets as specified above, 
shall be eligible for membership with the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska if they file a formal 
relinquishment of membership in the other tribe.

Section 3. The Executive Committee shall serve as the enrollment committee and shall approve 
membership with the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior; and shall have the authority to enact resolutions consistent with Article II of this constitution 
and to establish enrollment procedures.

Section. 4. Honorary tribal membership may be bestowed by the Executive Committee of the Iowa Tribe 
of Kansas and Nebraska. This honorary membership will entitle the individual to the title of "honorary 
tribal member" only, and does not qualify any such honorary member for tribal benefits, assets, or the 
right to vote as a member.

Section 1. The Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska in exercising its powers of self-government shall not:

ARTICLE Ill - Bill of Rights

a.  Make of enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of 
speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition fora 
redress of grievances;

b.  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers and effects 
against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon probable cause, 
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched and the 
person or thing to be seized;

c.  Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

d. Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;

e. Take any private property for public use without just compensation;

f.  Deny to any person in a criminal preceding the right to a speedy and public trial, to be 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against 
him or her, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his or her favor, and at his or 
her own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his or her defense;

g.  Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual punishments, and in 
no event impose for conviction of any one offense any penalty or punishment greater than that 
permitted by the provisions of the Indian Civil Rights Act (25 U.S.C. Sections 1301 through 1303, 
as amended from time to time.)

Section 2. This Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize the rights and 
privileges of the members of the tribe as citizens of any state or of the United States.

Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall 
not be altered, abridged, or otherwise affected by the provisions of this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODIES

 
 Section l.The General Council, composed of all enrolled members who are at least eighteen (18) years 
of age, shall exercise those governing authorities specifically set out for its use in this Constitution and 
Bylaws, subject to any limitation imposed by the laws or Constitution of the United States.

Section.2.The Executive Committee, composed of five (5) members elected at large from the General 
Council for four-year terms of office, shall exercise those authorities delegated to it by this constitution 
and bylaws. The General Council shall elect, by secret ballot, a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, 
Treasurer and member.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The Executive Committee of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the laws or the Constitution of 
the United States:

a.  To negotiate with Federal, State, and local governments and conclude contracts, grants, or 
other agreements including participation in the Farmers Home Administration Loan Program (84 
Stat. 120);

b.  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior;

c.  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation estimates or Federal 
projects for the benefit of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Office of Management and Budget and to Congress;

d. To lease tribal land in accordance with the law;

e.  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal lands, interests in lands, or 
other tribal assets without the consent of the tribe;

f. To regulate the conduct of the Executive Committee itself and of tribal meetings;

g.  To establish subordinate organizations for economic or social welfare purposes and to 
delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards, committees, or officials of the 
tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of 
such delegated power;

h.  To maintain law and order, and establish a tribal judicial system through enactment of codes 
and ordinances subject to the approval of the Assistant Secretary—Indian Affairs.

i.  To exercise any other authority in which the tribe is empowered to act now or in the future, 
except as otherwise provided in this constitution.

Section 2. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers not expressly referred to in this constitution shall not 
be abridged by this article, but shall remain with the tribe in the General Council and may be exercised 
through the adoption of appropriate constitutional amendments.

Section 3. Manner of Approval. Any ordinance or resolution which by the terms of this constitution, or 
as required by law, is subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to the 
Superintendent who shall promptly arrange for the appropriate official to either approve or disapprove 
such tribal enactment. It shall become effective only upon approval by the Secretary or his authorized 
representative.

Section 4. Tribal Delegations.

a.  When it is necessary for a delegation to represent the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, the 
delegates are to be chosen by the Executive Committee. The number of delegation trips shall be 
held to a minimum as requirements dictate.

b.  When a delegation is authorized to meet with government officials by authority of the 
Executive Committee, said delegation shall provide a full report of its findings to the Executive 
Committee at its next regular meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - REMOVAL, RECALL, REFERENDUM AND FILLING VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Removal. Any member of the Executive Committee or other official of the Iowa Tribe of 
Kansas and Nebraska, who during the term for which he is elected or appointed, is convicted of a felony, 
shall automatically forfeit his office, effective on the date of his initial conviction in court. Any such 
official found guilty in any court, or by the Executive Committee, of behavior involving misconduct 
reflecting on the dignity and integrity of the tribal government, malfeasance in office, or gross neglect of 
duty, may be removed from office if at least four (4) members of the Executive Committee vote in favor 
of such removal. Voting must be by secret ballot and the Chairman is entitled to vote. If the accused is a 
member of the Executive Committee, the accused shall have the right to cast a secret ballot. Before any 
vote for removal from office is taken, such member or officer shall be given a written statement of the 
charges against him at least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Executive Committee at which he is 
to appear, and he shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all charges at the designated 
Executive Committee meeting.

The decision of the Executive Committee shall be final, and such Executive Committee member or 
official shall not be returned to office unless duly elected by the General Council. No member of the 
Executive Committee shall preside over the meeting at which his removal is being considered.

Section. 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least seventy-five percent (75%) of the 
number of voters who signed the register at the preceding election, it shall be the duty of the Chairman 
to call and conduct within thirty (30) days, a special meeting of the General Council to consider the recall 
of a member of the Executive Committee. Such meeting is subject to quorum provisions. Only one (1) 
member of the Committee shall be considered for recall at any given recall meeting. Once an individual 
is subjected to recall proceedings, he shall not again be considered for such action during the balance of 
his term of office. If the Chairman is the object of a recall petition, it shall be the duty of the Vice- 
Chairman to call and conduct the special recall meeting. If the Vice-Chairman refuses to call and conduct 
such a meeting, the other officers in descending rank shall be empowered to do so. If each of the

Executive Committee members refuses to call and conduct such a meeting, the spokesman for the 
petitioners shall be empowered to do so.

Section. 3. Initiative and Referendum Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least sixty (60) qualified 
voters, it shall be the duty of the Chairman to call and conduct within thirty (30) days, a special meeting 
of the General Council for the purpose of presenting to the voters for their determination any issue or 
question, except recall (See Section 2 of this Article for Recall). If the Chairman refuses to call such a 
meeting, the Vice-Chairman or other officer in descending rank shall be empowered to do so. If each of 
the Executive Committee members refuses to call and conduct such a meeting, the spokesman for the 
petitioners shall be empowered to do so. The decision of the majority of those voting shall be binding on 
the Executive Committee, provided a quorum is present. Once a petition concerning any issue or 
question has been submitted to a vote of the tribal members and rejected, that same issue or question 
shall not again be considered for such action for at least six (6) months.

The Chairman, upon written request by a majority of the Executive Committee, shall be required to 

call and conduct a special meeting of the General Council within thirty (30) days after receipt of such 
notice for the purpose of presenting to the voters for their determination, any issue or question except 
recall. (See Section 2 of this Article for Recall.) If the Chairman refuses to call such meeting, the Vice- 
Chairman or other officer in descending rank shall be empowered to do so.

Section. 4. Vacancies in the membership of the Executive Committee shall be filled as provided for in 
Article IX section 5. Vacancies in appointive positions shall be filled by appointment of the Executive 
Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE VII -CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 
 Section 1. Any Executive Committee member who may be personally interested in any matter before 
the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska Executive Committee shall not vote on such matter without the 
consent of the remaining members. Failure to reveal to the Committee a personal interest in a matter 
before that body, not similarly shared fay all members of the Committee, shall constitute dereliction of 
official duty, and may be cause for removal from office.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 Section 1. Ordinances. All final decisions on matters of general and permanent interest to members of 
the tribe shall be embodied in ordinances, such as an enrollment ordinance or an election ordinance.

Such enactments shall be available for inspection by members of the tribe during normal office hours.

Section. 2. Resolutions and Motions. All final decisions on matters of short term or one time interest 
where a formal expression is needed, shall be embodied in resolutions. Other decisions of a temporary 

nature or relating to particular individuals, officials or committees shall be put in the form of motions 
and noted in the minutes of the committee deliberations and shall be available for inspection by 
members of the tribe during normal office hours.

Section. 3. All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and numbered, and shall include a certification 
showing the presence of a quorum and the number of members voting for and against the proposed 
enactment.

Section. 4. No enactment of the Executive Committee, General Council or other body, shall have any 
validity or effect in the absence of a quorum of the membership thereof at a legally called session.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 Article IX of the Constitution and Bylaws of Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska is hereby revised in its 
entirely as follows, and such revised Article IX shall supersede any conflicting provision contained in 
the Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska.

Section 1. Elections and Terms of Office

All terms of office for the Executive committee members, incumbent at the time this amendments to 
the constitution becomes effective, shall expire on the first regular meeting of the Executive Committee 
following the election of October 2013. In the election of October 2013, the Chairman, Secretary, and 
Member will each be elected to a four (4) year term. In the election of October 2013, the Vice Chairman 
and Treasurer will each be elected to a two (2) year term.

Except as provided above, the terms of office for each member of the Executive Committee shall be four 
(4) years. Commencing in October 2015, elections shall be held every two (2) years for the appropriate 
offices with expiring terms as well as for special elections to fill vacancies in accordance with Article IX, 
Section 5.

Section 2. Election Ordinance

All tribal elections, including the first one under this Constitution, shall be conducted in accordance with 
an election ordinance, consistent with this Constitution, which shall be enacted by the Executive 
Committee. Such ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, nomination of candidates, and a 
procedure for resolving election disputes. Further, such ordinance shall require that no write in votes or 
absentee ballots be accepted in any tribal election since such elections shall be conducted during 
meetings of the General council. Such Ordinance shall also include provisions regarding the conduct of 
recall, referendum and initiative elections and a uniform procedure for submitting petitions.

Notwithstanding the foregoing, elections to amend this Constitution shall be conducted pursuant to 
Article XV of this Constitution.

Section 3. 

Voter Qualifications

Any member of the tribe shall be qualified to vote, provided that member is at least eighteen (18) years 
of age on the date of the election.

Section 4.  Qualifications of Candidates

Any member of the tribe who will be at least twenty-one (21) years of age on the date of the election, 
shall qualify as a candidate for membership on the Executive Committee, or a subordinate body by 
election or appointment, except those persons previously convicted in any court of competent 
jurisdiction, of a felony, or any member who is delinquently indebted to the tribe, provided that persons 
who have satisfied their penalty for a felony at least five (5) years before the election and otherwise 
qualify, may become candidates. Notwithstanding the foregoing, any person previously convicted in any 
court of competent jurisdiction of a felony in which the tribe is a victim shall not be eligible to be a 
candidate at any time.

Any current member of the Executive Committee, who intends to seek election to another office of the 
Executive Committee in an election when such member's current office is not up for election, shall 
submit a resignation at least ninety (90) days prior to the election. Such resignation will become 
effective on the first regular meeting of the Executive Committee following the election regardless of 
whether such member wins or loses the election for the different seat. The vacancy created by such 
resignation will be filled by special election in accordance with Article IX Section 5.

Section 5. 

Vacancies

Vacancies in the Executive Committee will be appointed by the Executive Committee until the next 
regularly scheduled election at which time the General Council will, by special election, elect a 
replacement to serve the remainder of the term for such office or for a new term, whichever is 
appropriate to maintain the staggered terms required by this Constitution; provided, however, that the 
unexpired term of any Executive Committee member who has submitted a resignation pursuant to 
Article IX, Section 4, shall be filled by the General Council at a special election held at the same time as 
the regularly scheduled election following the tender of such resignation. Each vacancy in the 
membership of the Executive Committee shall be filled by a tribal member who shall be qualified 
pursuant to Article IX, Section 4. Vacancies in appointive positions shall be filled by appointments of the 
Executive Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE X - INSTALLATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS

 
 Section 1. All duly elected Executive Committee members of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall 
be installed in office at the first succeeding regular meeting of the Executive Committee following their 
election, upon taking the following oath to be administered by such person as may be designated by 
resolution of the Executive Committee:

Oath: "I, (Name), do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the 
United States and the Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska; that I 
will carry out, faithfully and impartially, the duties of my office to the best of my ability; that I 
will cooperate with other members of the Executive Committee, promote, and protect the best 
interest of my tribe, in accordance with its constitution and bylaws."
 
 

ARTICLE XI - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The Chairman of the Executive Committee shall preside over all Executive Committee and 
General Council meetings of the tribe, except as otherwise provided in this constitution and bylaws. The 
Chairman shall be allowed to vote only in case of a tie except as provided in Article VI, Section 1, and 
shall exercise only the authority specifically delegated by the Executive Committee or as otherwise 
provided by this constitution and bylaws. The Chairman shall have the general supervision over the 
affairs of the Executive Committee and shall perform all duties pertaining to the office of Chairman.

Section 2. The Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee shall assist the Chairman when called upon to 
do so. In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall preside, and when so presiding, shall 
have all the rights, privileges, and duties, as well as the responsibilities, of the Chairman. In the event of 
an extended absence or inability of the Chairman to perform the duties as Chairman, and when the 
office is for either of these reasons declared by a majority vote of the Executive Committee to be vacant, 
the Vice-Chairman shall automatically succeed the Chairman and inherit the designated duties and 
responsibilities of this position. Should the office of Vice-Chairman be vacated before the tenure of the 
elected term expired, a new Vice-Chairman shall be elected in accordance with the provisions of Article 
IX, Section 5.

Section 3. The Secretary of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska Executive Committee shall correctly 
record the proceedings of all meetings of the Executive Committee and the General Council, and shall 
forward copies of the minutes and resolutions of all meetings to the Superintendent of the Morton 
Agency. The Secretary shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of correspondence 
pertaining to the business of the Committee. The Secretary shall make out the order of business at the 
direction of the Chairman, shall notify Committee members of their appointments, and shall have 
custody on behalf of the tribe of the records and papers of the Committee.

The Secretary shall keep a correct list of members of the Committee, shall authenticate accounts or 
order of the Committee and in the absence of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, shall call the meeting to 
order until a Chairman Pro Tempore is selected. The Secretary shall read the minutes of the previous 
meeting. At the expiration of the term of office, all records, equipment, supplies and tribal papers in the 

possession of the Secretary shall be turned over to the successor within ten (10) days. The Secretary 
shall issue notices of General Council meetings and make available by public announcement the 
anticipated agenda of such meetings. In the event of an extended absence or inability of the Secretary, 
and when the office is for either of these reasons declared by a majority vote of the Executive 
Committee to be vacant, the Treasurer shall assume the designated duties of office of the Secretary 
until such time as the election or appointment of a new Secretary

Section. 4. The Treasurer of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska Executive Committee shall be 
responsible for each yearly budget allowance received by the Executive Committee and shall keep an 
accurate account of all receipts and disbursements from this budget allowance. The Treasurer shall 
make appropriate reports (of all accounts) to the Executive Committee and present summary reports at 
meetings of the General Council, The accounts and records of the Executive Committee shall be open at 
all times for inspection and audit by the Assistant Secretary—Indian Affairs or his authorized 
representative. The books of the Treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection at the discretion of the 
Executive Committee. All budget funds entrusted to the care of the Treasurer shall be kept in a special 
account in a bank authorized by the Executive Committee and all disbursements therefore shall be made 
by check with the checks to be countersigned by the Chairman of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
Executive Committee. The Treasurer shall file a surety bond satisfactory to the Executive Committee and 
the Assistant Secretary—Indian Affairs or his authorized representative. The cost of all tribal surety 
bonds shall be paid from tribal funds. All disbursements from tribal funds shall be made under authority 
of a properly executed resolution. In the event of an extended absence or inability of the Treasurer to 
perform his duties, and when the office is for either of these reasons declared by a majority vote of the 
Executive Committee to be vacant, the Secretary of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska Executive 
Committee, when properly bonded, shall assume the designated duties of the Treasurer until a new 
Treasurer has been elected or appointed.

Section 5. Appointive Officers. The duties of all appointive committees and officers shall be clearly 
defined by resolution at the time of their creation or appointment. Such committees or officers shall 
report from time to time, as required, to their appointing'" body; their activities and decisions shall be 
subject to review by such body upon petition of any person aggrieved.

Section. 6. Tribal Employees. Whenever it becomes necessary, the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
shall employ tribal employees. The employees shall be tribal members if at all possible. Any member of 
the tribe may be employed by the tribe whether or not he holds an elective or appointive office. 
Applicants will apply to the Executive Committee, and the Committee shall prepare a list for 
presentation to the Executive Committee. A fifteen (15) day public notice shall be given in which to 
receive such applications. The funds for salaries may be from allocated funds, i.e., tribal funds, State or 
Federal grants, or funds provided by any organization, foundations, or other source. Any and all tribal 
employee (s) shall come under the jurisdiction of this constitution and bylaws. A work and expense 
report OF and BY_ the employee (s) shall be made to the Executive Committee each quarter on dates 
specified by the Executive Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1.  General Council Meeting.

a.  Annual meetings of the General Council shall be held on the third (3rdJ Saturday in October 
for the purpose of receiving reports, and transacting other business.

b.  Special meetings of the General Council may be called at the discretion of the Chairman, and 
shall be called by the Chairman upon receipt of a petition signed by forty (40) members of the 
General Council, or by resolution of the Executive Committee. Should the Chairman refuse to 
timely call a special meeting requested by either a petition of the Council or a resolution of the 
Executive Committee, the next highest ranking officer shall exercise such authority, except as 
provided in Article VI, Sections 1 and 2.

c.  Notice of Special General Council Meeting. The principal object of a special General Council 
meeting must be stated in the notification and may include the words "and for the transaction 
of other business that may be presented." Such notice shall be publicly posted for at least five 
(5) days in advance of the meeting date.

d.  The Agenda for all meetings of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska General Council shall 
be compiled in advance by the Executive Committee. Following the completion of discussion on 
all agenda items, other tribal business may be discussed.

e.  Quorum. No business of any nature shall be transacted by the General Council unless a 
quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of thirty (30) members of the General Council. Except 
for the election of the Executive Committee which shall be decided by a plurality vote (larger 
vote than any other candidate), decisions shall be reached by a majority vote (more than half 
the votes cast). The Chairman shall not vote except in the event of a tie and in the election of 
the Executive Committee. In the event a quorum is not achieved at the annual meeting, when 
an election is required, the election part of such meeting shall proceed as scheduled in order to 
carry out the intent of the constitution and bylaws.

Section 2.  Conduct of Meetings.

All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order, as 

a. 
amended, unless otherwise specified in this constitution and bylaws.

b. Order of Business

(1) 
(2) 
(3) 
(4) 
(5) 

Call to Order
Roll Call
Adoption of Minutes
Reports
Unfinished  Business

(6) 
(7) 

New Business
Adjournment

Section. 3. Executive Committee Meetings. All meetings of the Executive Committee shall be open to 
tribal members.

a.  Frequency. Meetings of the Executive Committee shall be held monthly or as may be fixed by 
resolution of the Executive Committee.

b.  Quorum. Three (3) members of the Executive Committee shall constitute a quorum at all 
Executive Committee meetings.

c.  Meeting Notice. An appropriate written notice shall be given to each Executive Committee 
member by the Secretary unless a regular time is specified by an Executive Committee 
resolution.

d.  Absences from regular meetings must be excused by a majority vote of the Committee 
members present. Two (2) successive or a total of three (3) unexcused absences in one (1) year 
may be sufficient cause to remove a Committee member from office. The decision will be left up 
to a majority of the Executive Committee.

e.  Special or Emergency Meetings. Special or emergency meetings of the Executive Committee 
may be called by the Chairman or by any three (3) members of the Executive Committee. The 
notice in regard to any special or emergency meeting shall be given verbally in person, or by 
telephone, or by written notice to each Executive Committee member as early as possible prior 
to the meeting, stating the purpose of the meeting. The order of business as required by Section 
2 (b) of Article XIl, may be waived if necessary in dealing with emergency matters.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SAVINGS CLAUSE AND REPEAL OF PREVIOUS CONSTITUTION

 
 Section 1. The Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska approved on February 
26, 1937, as amended in 1960, 1961 and 2013 under the provisions of Section 16 of the Act of June 18, 
1934 (84 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378), is hereby repealed and 
superseded by this constitution and bylaws.

Section. 2. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
shall remain in full force and effect to the extent they are consistent with this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provisions of this constitution and bylaws shall, in the future, be declared invalid by a court of 
competent jurisdiction, the invalid provisions shall be severed and the remaining provisions shall 
continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Iowa 
Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior, provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; 
but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed amendment at the 
request of the General Council, the Executive Committee, or upon receipt of a petition of at least one 
hundred (100) qualified voters of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska. The amendment election shall 
be authorized by the Secretary of the Interior and conducted pursuant to his regulations set forth in 25 
CFR 52.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Iowa Tribe 
of Kansas and Nebraska, voting at an election called for that propose by the Secretary of the Interior, in 
which at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall cast their ballots, shall be submitted to 
the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be effective from the date of his approval.

