 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
FOR THE IOWA TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF THE IOWA RESERVATION IN 
NEBRASKA AND KANSAS


 
  
  
 APPROVED FEBRUARY 26, 1937 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON: 1937 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE IOWA TRIBE OF
INDIANS OF THE IOWA RESERVATION IN NEBRASKA 
AND KANSAS

PREAMBLE


We, the people of the Iowa Tribe, in order to set up a recognized 
body to handle our tribal affairs and to get and enjoy the, benefits 
of organization under the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 
1934, do hereby establish this Constitution and By-laws.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Iowa Tribe shall extend to the territory 
within the confines of the Iowa Reservation, as defined in the Treaty 
of March 6, 1861, and to such other lands as may be hereafter added 
thereto.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Iowa Tribe shall consist of: 
(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll of the tribe as of January 1, 1937: Provided, That 
within one year from adoption and approval of this Constitution 
and By-laws correction may be made in the said roll by the Gen
eral Tribal Council subject to approval of the Secretary of the 

(b) All children born to any member of the Iowa Tribe who is a 
resident of the reservation at the time of the birth of said children.
Sec. 2. The General Tribal Council shall have the power to make 
ordinances subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior cov
ering future membership and the adoption of new members.

Article III—Governing Body

Sec. 1. The governing body of the Iowa Tribe shall be the Gen
eral Tribal Council which shall be composed of all the qualified 
voters of the Iowa Tribe.

 Sec. 2. All enrolled members of the Iowa Tribe who are 21 years 
of age or over shall be qualified voters at each election provided 
they either reside on the reservation or maintain a home within 
25 miles of the reservation boundaries and take enough interest in 
tribal affairs to register before any election with the Secretary of 
the General Tribal Council after the approval of this Constitution 
and By-laws, the manner of such registration to be designated by 
the Executive Committee. 

Sec. 3. The General Tribal Council shall elect from its qualified 
voters by secret ballot (a) a Chairman; (b) a Vice-Chairman; (c) a 
Secretary; (d) a Treasurer; (e) and such other officers and com
mittees as may be deemed necessary.

Interior; 
 
 

 
 
 Sec. 4. The General Tribal Council shall meet at least twice a 
 year on the last Monday of January aad July. Within 30 days 
after the ratification and approval of this Constitution and By-laws, 
a General Tribal Council shall be called by the present Iowa Busi
ness Committee for the. purpose of electing the officers named herein 
under such regulations as may be prescribed by said committee, and 
it shall transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers 
elected at this meeting: shall serve until the July meeting at which 
time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be 
chosen at the July meeting. The Chairman, or 25 per cent of the 
qualified voters, may by written notice, call special meetings of the 
General Tribal Council.

One third of the qualified voters of the Tribe shall constitute a 

quorum at any special or regular meeting.

Sec. 5.  There shall be an Executive Committee, consisting of the 
Chairman, Vice-chairman, Secretary, and Treasurer of the, Gen
eral Tribal Council which shall perform such duties as may be au
thorized by that Council.

Article IV—Powers of the General Tribal Council

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The General Tribal Council of 
the Iowa Tribe shall exercise the following powers, subject to any 
limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States;

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local government;
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;
(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, tribal funds, or other tribal assets;

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Iowa Tribe prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau 
of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To make and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior, providing for the manner 
of making, holding, and revolting assignments of tribal land or 
interests therein, and to make leases of tribal land in accordance with 
law;

(f)  To provide for the levying of taxes and the appropriation of 

available tribal funds for public purposes of the Iowa Tribe;

(g)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the General 
Tribal Council itself and of tribal officials, or tribal organizations 
and of tribal meetings and elections;

(h)  To charter subordinate organizations for. economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated powers. 
 Sec. 2. Future powers.—The General Tribal Council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Council 
by any member or members of the tribe or by the Secretary of the 
Interior or any other duly authorized official or agency of the State 
or Federal Government.

 Sec. 3. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Iowa Tribe but not expressly referred to in this Constitution 
shall not be abridged by this article, but may be. exercised by the 
people of the Iowa Tribe through the adoption of appropriate by- 
laws and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which 
by the terms of this constitution, is subject to review by the Secre
tary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the 
reservation who shall, within ten days thereafter, approve or dis
approve the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance- or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secre
tary of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of en
actment, annul the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by 
notifying the General Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him, within ten days after its enactment, he 
shall advise the Council of his reasons therefor. If these reasons 
appear to the General Tribal Council insufficient, it may, by a 
majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of 
the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of its enact
ment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or 
resolution shall become effective.

Article V—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the tribe voting at an election called 
for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that 
at least 30 per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such elec
tion; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have 
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment upon receipt of a petition 
signed by one-third of the qualified voters of the tribe.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE IOWA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF THE IOWA RESER
VATION IN NEBRASKA AND KANSAS

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman of the General Tribal Council.—The Chair
man shall preside over all meetings of the General Tribal Council, 
shall perform the usual duties of a Chairman, and exercise any 
authority delegated to him by the said Council; He shall vote 
only in the case of a tie.

Sec. 2. Vice-chairman of the General Tribal Council.—The Vice
chairman shall assist the Chairman when called upon to do so and 
in the absence of the Chairman he shall preside. When so pre
siding, he shall have all the rights, privileges and duties as well as 
the responsibilities of the Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary of the General Tribal Council. The Secretary 
shall handle all tribal correspondence and shall keep an accurate 
record of all matters transacted at General Tribal Council and
 
 

 
 
 Executive Committee meetings. It shall be his duty to submit 
promptly to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction, and the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, copies of all minutes of regular and 
special meetings of the General Tribal Council.

Sec. 4.—Treasurer of the General Tribal Council. The Treasurer 
shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all funds 
in the custody of the Council. He shall deposit all funds in such 
depositary as the General Tribal Council shall direct and shall make 
and preserve a faithful record of such funds and shall report on all 
receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds 
in his possession and custody, at each regular meeting of the Gen
eral Tribal Council, and at such other times as requested by the 
General Tribal Council or the Executive Committee.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his 
possession or custody, except in accordance with a resolution duly 
passed by the General Tribal Council.

The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the 
General Tribal Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
when in the opinion of the said Council or Commissioner there are 
sufficient funds in the General Tribal Council treasury to warrant 
such action.

Sec. 5. Appointive officers.—The duties of all appointive boards, 
committees, or officers of the tribe shall be clearly defined by resolu
tions of the General Tribal Council at the, time of their creation 
or appointment. Such boards, committees, and officers shall report, 
from time to time as required, to the General Tribal Council, and 
their activities and decisions shall be subject to review by the Gen
eral Tribal Council upon the petition of any person aggrieved.

Article II—Ratification of Constitution ano By-Laws

This Constitution and these By-laws, when adopted by a majority 
vote of the voters of the Iowa Tribe voting at a special election 
called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 30 per 
cent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be in force 
from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved December 18, 1936, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached Constitution, and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the Iowa Tribe of Indians of the Iowa 
Reservation in Nebraska and Kansas, and was on January 23. 1937, 
duly ratified by a vote of 88 for, and 1 against, in an election in 
which over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, 
in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 16, 
1935, (49 Slat. 378).

Harvey Campbell, 

Chairman of Election Board.

   John DeRoin,

Secretary of Election Board.

H. E. Bruce,

Superintendent.
 
 

 
 
 I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Iowa Tribe in Nebraska 
and Kansas.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
or By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended February 18, 1937.

William Zimmerman, Jr.

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.
 [seal] 

Washington, D. C. February 26,1937

