 
  
  
 AMENDMENT 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 of the 
 

IOWA TRIBE OF KANSAS AND NEBRASKA

AMENDMENT I


Section 2, of Article IV - Governing Bodies, shall be amended to read 
as follows:

Section 2. The Executive Committee, composed of five (5) 
members elected at large from the General Council for three 
year terms of office, shall exercise those authorities 
delegated to it by this constitution and bylaws. The General 
Council shall elect, by secret ballot, a Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer and member.

Section 1, of Article IX - Elections, shall be amended to read as 
follows:

Section 1. First Election. All terms of office for the 
Executive Committee members, incumbent at the time this 
amendment to the constitution and bylaws becomes effective, 
shall expire at the first annual meeting following the 
approval date of this amendment. Thereafter, there shall 
be an election of all five members of the Executive 
Committee at each third annual meeting of the general 
council and all terms shall be three (3) years in length.

Section 1, a., (first sentence) of Article XII - Meetings, shall be 
amended to read as follows:

Section 1, a. Annual meetings of the General Council 
shall be held on the third (3rd) Saturday in October 
for the purpose of receiving reports and transacting 
other business. An election of the Executive Committee 
shall be held at each third annual meeting beginning 
with the first annual meeting following this 
amendment.

Section 4, of Article VI - Removal, Recall, Referendum and Filling 
Vacancies, shall be amended to read as follows:

Section 4. Vacancies in the membership of the Executive 
Committee which occur in the first half of the elected 
three year term shall be filled at a special election as 

provided for in the tribal election ordinance. Vacancies 
occuring in the second hald of the elected three year term 
shall be filled by appointment of the Executive Committee. 
Each vacancy in the membership of the Executive Committee 
shall be filled by a tribal member who shall be qualified 
pursuant to Article IX, Section 4. Vacancies in appointive 
positions shall be filled by appointment of the Executive 
Committee.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 AMENDMENT NO. I

Pursuant to an order of Stanley Speaks, Area Director, the attached

Amendment No. I to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of

Kansas and Nebraska was submitted for ratification to the adult 

members of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska and was on 8-727-80 
duly ratified by a vote of 166 for and 90 against, in an 

election duly called for that purpose.
 
 

APPROVAL

AMENDMENT I

 
 By virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior 

by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated 

to the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs by Secretarial Order No. 

3010 42 F.R. 53682 and redelegated to me by 10 BIAM 3.1, 40 F.R.

17046 do hereby approve the attached Amendment No. 1 to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska.

Approval Recommended:

Date: 9/10/80
 
  
 

AMENDMENT

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

 
 of the 
 

IOWA TRIBE OF KANSAS AND NEBRASKA

AMENDMENT II


Section 1, e., of Article XII - Meetings, shall be amended to read as 
follows:

Section 1, e. Quorum. No business of any nature shall be 
transacted by the General Council unless a quorum is present. 
A quorum shall consist of thirty (30) members of the General 
Council. Except for the election of the Executive Committee 
which shall be decided by a plurality vote (larger vote than 
any other candidate), decisions shall be reached by a majority 
vote (more than half the votes cast). The Chairman shall not 
vote except in the event of a tie and in the election of the 
Executive Committee. In the event a quorum is not achieved 
at the annual meeting, when an election is required, the 
election part of such meeting shall proceed as scheduled in 
order to carry out the intent of the constitution and bylaws.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 AMENDMENT NO. II

Pursuant to an order of Stanley Speaks, Area Director, the attached 

Amendment No. II to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of 

Kansas and Nebraska was submitted for ratification to the adult

members of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska and was on 8-27-80

duly ratified by a vote of 184 

for and 71 against, in an 

election duly called for that purpose.
 
 

APPROVAL

AMENDMENT II

 
 By virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior 

by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated 

to the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs by Secretarial Order No. 

3010 42 F.R. 53682 and redelegated to me by 10 BIAM 3.1, 40 F.R.

17046 do hereby approve the attached Amendment No. II to the 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska.

Approval Recommended:

Date: 9/10/80
 
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF IOWA TRIBE OF KANSAS AND NEBRASKA 
 
 (as amended August 27, 1980) 
 

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, initially 
organized under a constitution and bylaws approved February 26, 1937, 
pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), do hereby establish this constitution and bylaws under the 
authority of the IRA in order to form a more functional government, 
develop our tribal resources and promote the economic and social 
welfare of ourselves and our descendants.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Iowa Tribe shall extend to the territory 
within the confines of the Iowa Reservation as defined in the Treaty 
of March 6, 1861, and to such other lands as may be hereafter added 
thereto.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
shall consist of the following:

a. All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on 
the official census roll of the tribe as of January 1, 
1937; provided that the roll may be corrected at any 
time by the General Council, subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior.

b. All lineal descendants of persons enrolled under 
Section 1 (a), one of whose parents is an enrolled 
member of the tribe and; provided such descendant 
possesses Iowa of Kansas and Nebraska Indian blood.

Sec. 2. Persons who are enrolled as members of another Indian 
tribe shall not be eligible for enrollment with the Iowa Tribe 
of Kansas and Nebraska if they have, by virtue of enrollment as 
members of another Indian tribe, shared in assets of that tribe, 
including land or monetary benefits. Persons who are enrolled as 
members of another Indian tribe and have not shared in tribal 
assets as specified above, shall be eligible for membership with 
the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska if they file a formal 
relinquishment of membership in the other tribe.
 
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF IOWA TRIBE OF KANSAS AND NEBRASKA 
 
 (as amended August 27, 1980) 
 

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, initially 
organized under a constitution and bylaws approved February 26, 1937, 
pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act (IRA) of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), do hereby establish this constitution and bylaws under the 
authority of the IRA in order to form a more functional government, 
develop our tribal resources and promote the economic and social 
welfare of ourselves and our descendants.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Iowa Tribe shall extend to the territory 
within the confines of the Iowa Reservation as defined in the Treaty 
of March 6, 1861, and to such other lands as may be hereafter added 
thereto.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
shall consist of the following:

a. All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on 
the official census roll of the tribe as of January 1, 
1937; provided that the roll may be corrected at any 
time by the General Council, subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior.

b. All lineal descendants of persons enrolled under 
Section 1 (a), one of whose parents is an enrolled 
member of the tribe and; provided such descendant 
possesses Iowa of Kansas and Nebraska Indian blood.

Sec. 2. Persons who are enrolled as members of another Indian 
tribe shall not be. eligible for enrollment with the Iowa Tribe 
of Kansas and Nebraska if they have, by virtue of enrollment as 
members of another Indian tribe, shared in assets of that tribe, 
including land or monetary benefits. Persons who are enrolled as 
members of another Indian tribe and have not shared in tribal 
assets as specified above, shall be eligible for membership with 
the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska if they file a formal 
relinquishment of membership in the other tribe.

Sec. 3. The Executive Committee shall serve as the enrollment 
committee and shall approve membership with the Iowa Tribe of Kansas 
and Nebraska, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior; 
and shall have the authority to enact resolutions consistent with 
Article II of this constitution and to establish enrollment procedures.

Sec. 4. Honorary tribal membership may be bestowed by the Executive 
Committee of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska. This honorary 
membership will entitle the individual to the title of "honorary 
tribal member" only, and does not qualify any such honorary member 
for tribal benefits, assets, or the right to vote as a member.
 
 

ARTICLE III - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the tribe shall enjoy without hindrance, 
freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and association.

Sec. 2. This constitution and bylaws shall not in any way alter, 
abridge, or otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the 
members of the tribe as citizens of the States of Kansas and Nebraska, 
or the United States.

Sec. 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Iowa 
Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall not be altered, abridged, or 
otherwise affected by the provisions of this constitution and bylaws.

Sec. 4. Tribal members shall have the right to review all tribal 
records, including financial records, at any reasonable time in 
accordance with procedures established by the Executive Committee.

Sec. 5. In accordance with Title II of the Indian Civil Rights Act 
of 1968 (82 Stat. 77), the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska in 
exercising its powers of self-government shall not:

a.  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free 
exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of 
speech, or of the press, or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress 
of grievances;

b.  Violate the right of the people to be secure in 
their persons, houses, papers and effects against 
unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but 

upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, 
and particularly describing the place to be searched 
and the person or thing to be seized;

c.  Subject any person for the same offense to be 
twice put in jeopardy;

d.  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a 
witness against himself;

e.  Take any private property for a public use with
out just compensation;

f.  Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the 
right to a speedy and public trial, to be informed 
of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be 
confronted with the witnesses against him, to have 
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his 
favor, and at his own expense to have the assistance 
of counsel for his defense;

g.  Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, 
inflict cruel and unusual punishments, and in no 
event impose for conviction of any one offense any 
penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for 
a term of six (6) months or a fine of $500 or both;

h.  Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the 
equal protection of its laws or deprive any person 
of liberty or property without due process of laws;

i.  Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; 
or

j.  Deny to any person accused of an offense 
punishable by imprisonment the right, upon request, 
to a trial by jury of not less than six (6) persons,
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODIES

 
 Section 1. The General Council, composed of all enrolled members 
who are at least eighteen (18) years of age, shall exercise those 
governing authorities specifically set out for its use in this 
constitution and bylaws, subject to any limitation imposed by the 
laws or Constitution of the United States.

Sec.2.The Executive Committee, composed of five (5) members 
elected at large from the General Council for three-year terms of 
office, shall exercise those authorities delegated to it by this 
constitution and bylaws. The General Council shall elect, by 
secret ballot, a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer 
and member.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The Executive Committee of the Iowa 
Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall exercise the following powers, 
subject to any limitations imposed by the laws or the Constitution 
of the United States: 

'

a.  To negotiate with Federal, State, and local 
governments and conclude contracts, grants, or other 
agreements including participation in the Farmers 
Home Administration Loan Program (84 Stat. 120);

b.  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel 
and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior; 

.

c.  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with 
regard to all appropriation estimates or Federal 
projects for the benefit of the Iowa Tribe of 
Kansas and Nebraska prior to the submission of 
such estimates to the Office of Management and 
Budget and to Congress;

d.  To lease tribal land in accordance with the law;

e. 
To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or 
encumbrance of tribal lands, interests in lands, 
or other tribal assets without the consent of the 
tribe;

f.  To regulate the conduct of the Executive 
Committee itself and of tribal meetings;

To establish subordinate organizations for 

g. 
economic or social welfare purposes and to delegate 
to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards, 
committees, or officials of the tribe, any of the 
foregoing powers, reserving the right to review 
any action taken by virtue of such delegated power;

h.  To maintain law and order, and establish a tribal 
judicial system through enactment of codes and 
ordinances subject: to the approval of the Assistant 
Secretary—Indian Affairs.

i.  To exercise any other authority in which the tribe 
is empowered to act now or in the future, except as 
otherwise provided in this constitution.

Sec. 2. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers not expressly 
referred to in this constitution shall not be abridged by this 
article, but shall remain with the tribe in the General Council 
and may be exercised through the adoption of appropriate 

 constitutional amendments.

Sec. 3. Manner of Approval. Any ordinance or resolution which 
by the terms of this constitution, or as required by law, is 
subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be 
submitted to the Superintendent who shall promptly arrange for the 
appropriate official to either approve or disapprove such tribal 
enactment. It shall become effective only upon approval by the 
Secretary or his authorized representative.

Sec. 4. Tribal Delegations.

a.  When it is necessary for a delegation to represent 
the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, the delegates are to 
be chosen by the Executive Committee. The number 
of delegation trips shall be held to a minimum as 
requirements dictate.

b.  When a delegation is authorized to meet with 
government officials by authority of the Executive 
Committee, said delegation shall provide a full report 
of its findings to the Executive Committee at its 
next regular meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - REMOVAL, RECALL, REFERENDUM AND FILLING VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Removal. Any member of the Executive Committee or other 
official of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, who during the 
term for which he is elected or appointed, is convicted of a felony, 
shall automatically forfeit his office, effective on the date of 
his initial conviction in court. Any such official found guilty 
in any court, or by the Executive Committee, of behavior involving 
misconduct reflecting on the dignity and integrity of the tribal 
government, malfeasance in office, or gross neglect of duty, may 
be removed from office if at least four (4) members of the Executive 
Committee vote in favor of such removal. Voting must be by secret 
ballot and the Chairman is entitled to vote. If the accused is a 
member of the Executive Committee, the accused shall have the right 
to cast a secret ballot.. Before any vote for removal from office 
is taken, such member or officer shall be given a written statement 
of the charges against him at least ten (10) days before the meeting 
of the Executive Committee at which he is to appear, and he shall 
be given an opportunity to answer any and all charges at the designated 
Executive Committee meeting. The decision of the Executive Committee 
shall be final, and such Executive Committee member or official shall 
not be returned to office unless duly elected by the General Council. 
No member of the Executive Committee shall preside over the meeting 
at which his removal is being considered.

Sec. 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 
seventy-five percent (75%) of the number of voters who signed the 
register at the preceding election, it shall be the duty of the 
Chairman to call and conduct within thirty (30) days, a special 
meeting of the General Council to consider the recall of a member 
of the Executive Committee. Such meeting is subject to quorum 
provisions. Only one (1) member of the Committee shall be considered 
for recall at any given recall meeting. Once an individual is 
subjected to recall proceedings, he shall not again be considered 
for such action during the balance of his term of office. If the 
Chairman is the object of a recall petition, it shall be the duty 
of the Vice-Chairman to call and conduct the special recall meeting. 
If the Vice-Chairman refuses to call and conduct such a meeting, 
the other officers in descending rank shall be empowered to do so. 
If each of the Executive Committee members refuses to call and 
conduct such a meeting, the spokesman for the petitioners shall 
be empowered to do so.

Sec. 3. Initiative and Referendum. Upon receipt of a petition 
signed by at least sixty (60) qualified voters, it shall be the 
duty of the Chairman to call and conduct within thirty (30) days, 
a special meeting of the General Council for the purpose of presenting 
to the voters for their determination any issue or question, except 
recall (See Section 2 of this Article for Recall). If the Chairman 
refuses to call such a meeting, the Vice-Chairman or other officer 
in descending rank shall be empowered to do so. If each of the 
Executive Committee members refuses to call and conduct such a 
meeting, the spokesman for the petitioners shall be empowered to 
do so. The decision of the majority of those voting shall be binding 
on the Executive Committee, provided a quorum is present. Once a 
petition concerning any issue or question has been submitted to a 
vote of the tribal members and rejected, that same issue or question 
shall not again be considered for such action for at least six (6) 
months. 

.

The Chairman, upon written request by a majority of the Executive 
Committee, shall be required to call and conduct a special meeting 
of the General Council within thirty (30) days after receipt of such 
notice for the purpose of presenting to the voters for their determination, 
any issue or question except recall. (See Section 2 of this Article 
for Recall.) If the Chairman refuses to call such meeting, the 
Vice-Chairman or other officer in descending rank shall be empowered 
to do so.

Sec. 4. Vacancies in the membership of the Executive Committee which 
occur in the first half of the elected three year term shall be filled 
at a special election as provided for in the tribal election ordinance. 
Vacancies occuring in the second half of the elected three year term 
shall be filled by appointment of the Executive Committee. Each 
vacancy in the membership of the Executive Committee shall be filled by 
a tribal members who shall be qualified pursuant to Article IX, Section 4. 
Vacancies in appointive positions shall be filled by appointment of the 
Executive Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - CONFLICTS OF INTEREST

 
 Section 1. Any Executive Committee member who may be personally 
interested in any matter before the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
Executive Committee shall not vote on such matter without the consent 
of the remaining members. Failure to reveal to the Committee a personal 
interest in a matter before that body, not similarly shared by all 
members of the Committee, shall constitute dereliction of official 
duty, and may be cause for removal from office.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 Section 1. Ordinances. All final decisions on matters of general 
and permanent interest to members of the tribe shall be embodied 
in ordinances, such as an enrollment ordinance or an election ordinance. 
Such enactments shall be available for inspection by members of 
the tribe during normal office hours.

Sec. 2. Resolutions and Motions. All final decisions on matters 
of short term or one time interest where a formal expression is needed, 
shall be embodied in resolutions. Other decisions of a temporary nature 
or relating to particular individuals, officials or committees shall 
be put in the form of motions and noted in the minutes of the committee 
deliberations and shall be available for inspection by members of 
the tribe during normal office hours.

Sec. 3. All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and numbered, 
and shall include a certification showing the presence of a quorum 
and the number of members voting for and against the proposed enactment.

Sec. 4 . No enactment of the Executive Committee, General Council or 
other body, shall have any validity or effect in the absence of a 
quorum of the membership thereof at a legally called session.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election. All terms of office for the Executive 
Committee members, incumbent at the time this amendment to the 
constitution and bylaws becomes effective, shall expire at the first 
annual meeting following the approval date of this amendment. There
after, there shall be an election of all five (5) members of the 
Executive Committee at each third annual meeting of the General 
Council and all terms shall be three (3) years in length.

Sec. 2. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, including the 
first one under this constitution, shall be conducted in accordance 
with an election ordinance, consistent with this constitution and 
bylaws, which shall be enacted by the Executive Committee. Such 
ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, nomination of candidates, 
and a procedure for resolving election disputes. Further, it shall 
require that no write-in votes or absentee ballots be accepted in 
any tribal election since such elections shall be conducted during 
meetings of the General Council. Provisions shall also be included 
regarding the conduct of recall, referendum and initiative elections 
and a uniform procedure for submitting petitions. Elections to amend 
this constitution shall be conducted pursuant to Article XV of this 
document.

Sec. 3. Voter Qualifications. Any member of the tribe shall be 
qualified to vote, provided the member is eighteen (18) years of 
age or over on the date of the election.

Sec. 4. Qualifications of Candidates. Any member of the tribe 
who will be at least twenty-one (21) years of age on the date of 
the election, shall qualify as a candidate for membership on the 
Executive Committee, or a subordinate body by election or appointment, 
except those persons previously convicted in any court of competent 
jurisdiction of a felony, or any member who is delinquently indebted 
to the tribe, provided that persons who have satisfied their penalty 
for a felony at least five (5) years before the election and otherwise 
qualify, may become candidates. 

.
 
 

ARTICLE X - INSTALLATION OF ELECTED OFFICIALS

 
 Section 1. All duly elected Executive Committee members of the Iowa 
Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall be installed in office at the 
first succeeding regular meeting of the Executive Committee following 
their election, upon taking the following oath to be administered 
by such person as may be designated by resolution of the Executive 
Committee:

Oath: "I, (Name), do solemnly swear that I will support 
and defend the Constitution of the United States and the 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and 
Nebraska; that I will carry out, faithfully and 
impartially, the duties of my office to the best of my 
ability; that I will cooperate with other members of 
the Executive Committee, promote, and protect the best 
interest of my tribe, in accordance with its constitution 
and bylaws."
 
 

ARTICLE XI - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The Chairman of the Executive Committee shall preside 
over all Executive Committee and General Council meetings of the 
tribe, except as other wise provided in this constitution and bylaws. 
The Chairman shall be allowed to vote only in case of a.tie except 
as provided in Article VI, Section 1, and shall exercise only the 
authority specifically delegated by the Executive Committee or as other
wise provided by this constitution and bylaws. The Chairman shall have 
the general supervision over the affairs of the Executive Committee 
and shall perform all duties pertaining to the office of Chairman.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman of the Executive Committee shall assist 
the Chairman when called upon to do so. In the absence of the 
Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall preside, and when so presiding, 
shall have all the rights, privileges, and duties, as well as the 
responsibilities, of the Chairman. In the event of an extended 
absence or inability of the Chairman to perform the duties as 
Chairman, and when the office is for either of these reasons 
declared by a majority vote of the Executive Committee to be vacant, 
the Vice-Chairman shall automatically succeed the Chairman and 
inherit the designated duties and responsibilities of this position. 
Should the office of Vice-Chairman be vacated before the tenure 
of the elected term expired, a new Vice-Chairman shall be elected 
in accordance with the provisions of Article VI, Section 4.

Sec. 3. The Secretary of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
Executive Committee shall correctly record the proceedings of all 
meetings of the Executive Committee and the General Council, and 
shall forward copies of the minutes and resolutions of all meetings 
to the Superintendent of the Horton Agency. The Secretary shall 
be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of correspondence 
pertaining to the business of the Committee. The Secretary shall 
make out the order of business at the direction of the Chairman, 
shall notify Committee members of their appointments, and shall have 
custody on behalf of the tribe of the records and papers of the 
Committee.

The Secretary shall keep a correct list of members of the Committee, 
shall authenticate accounts or order of the Committee and in the 
absence of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman, shall call the meeting 
to order until a Chairman Pro Tempore is selected. The Secretary 
shall read the minutes of the previous meeting. At the expiration 
of the term of office, all records, equipment, supplies and tribal 
papers in the possession of the Secretary shall be turned over to 
the successor within ten (10) days. The Secretary shall issue 
notices of General Council meetings and make available by public 
announcement the anticipated agenda of such meetings. In the event 
of an extended absence or inability of the Secretary, and when the 
office is for either of these reasons declared by a majority vote 
of the Executive Committee to be vacant, the Treasurer shall assume 
the designated duties of office of the Secretary until such time 
as the election or appointment of a new Secretary.

Sec. 4. The Treasurer of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska 
Executive Committee shall be responsible for each yearly budget 
allowance received by the Executive Committee and shall keep an 
accurate account of all receipts and disbursements from this budget 
allowance. The Treasurer shall make appropriate reports (of all 
accounts) to the Executive Committee and present summary reports 
at meetings of the General Council. The accounts and records of the 
Executive Committee shall be open at all times for inspection and 
audit by the Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs or his authorized 
representative. The books of the Treasurer shall be subject to 
audit or inspection at the discretion of the Executive Committee. 
All budget funds entrusted to the care of the Treasurer shall be 
kept in a special account in a bank authorized by the Executive 
Committee and all disbursements therefrom shall be made by check 
with the checks to be countersigned by the Chairman of the Iowa 
Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska Executive Committee. The Treasurer 
shall file a surety bond satisfactory to the Executive Committee 
and the Assistant Secretary--Indian Affairs or his authorized 
representative. The cost of all tribal surety bonds shall be paid 
from tribal funds. All disbursements from tribal funds shall be 
made under authority of a properly executed resolution. In the 
event of an extended absence or inability of the Treasurer to perform 
his duties, and when the office is for either of these reasons 
declared by a majority vote of the Executive Committee to be vacant, 
the Secretary of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska Executive 
Committee, when properly bonded, shall assume the designated duties 
of the Treasurer until a new Treasurer has been elected or appointed.

Sec. 5. Appointive Officers. The duties of all appointive committees 
and officers shall be clearly defined by resolution at the time of 
their creation or appointment. Such committees or officers shall 
report from time to time, as required, to their appointing body; 
their activities and decisions shall be subject to review by such 
body upon petition of any person aggrieved.

Sec. 6. Tribal Employees. Whenever it becomes necessary, the Iowa 
Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall employ tribal employees. The 
employees shall be tribal members if at all possible. Any member of the 
tribe may be employed by the tribe whether or not he holds an elective or 
appointive office. Applicants will apply to the Executive Committee, 
and the Committee shall prepare a list for presentation to the Executive 
Committee. A fifteen (15) day public notice shall be given in which 
to receive such applications. The funds for salaries may be from 
allocated funds, i.e., tribal funds, State or Federal grants, or 
funds provided by any organization, foundations, or other source. 
Any and all tribal employee (s) shall come under the jurisdiction 
of this constitution and bylaws. A work and expense report 
OF and BY the employee (s) shall be made to the Executive Committee 
each quarter on dates specified by the Executive Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. General Council Meeting.

a.  Annual meetings of the General Council shall be 
held on the third (3rd) Saturday 1n October for the 
purpose of receiving reports, and transacting other 
business. An election of the Executive Committee 
shall be held at each third (3rd) Annual Meeting 
beginning with the first Annual Meeting following 
this amendment.

b.  Special meetings of the General Council may be 
called at the discretion of the Chairman, and shall 
be called by the Chairman upon receipt of a petition 
signed by forty (40) members of the General Council, 
or by resolution of the Executive Committee. Should 
the Chairman refuse to timely call a special meeting 
requested by either a petition of the Council or 
a resolution of the Executive Committee, the next highest 
ranking officer shall exercise such authority, except 
as provided in Article VI, Sections 1 and 2.

c.  Notice of Special General Council Meeting. The 
principal object of a special General Council meeting 
must be stated in the notification and may include the 
words "and for the transaction of other business that 
may be presented." Such notice shall be publicly 
posted for at least five (5) days in advance of 
the meeting date..

d.  The Agenda for all meetings of the Iowa Tribe of 
Kansas and Nebraska General Council shall be compiled 
in advance by the Executive Committee. Following the 
completion of discussion on all agenda items, other 
tribal business may be discussed.

e.  Quorum. No business of any nature shall be 
transacted by the General Council unless a quorum is 
present. A quorum shall consist of thirty (30) members 
of the General Council. Except for the election 
of the Executive Committee which shall be decided by 
a plurality vote (larger vote than any other candidate), 
decisions shall be reached by a majority vote (more 
than half the votes cast). The Chairman shall not vote 
except in the event of a tie and in the election of the 
Executive Committee. In the event a quorum is not achieved 
at the annual meeting, when an election is required, the 
election part of such meeting shall proceed as scheduled 
in order to carry out the intent of the constitution 
and bylaws.

Sec. 2. Conduct of Meetings.

a.  All meetings shall be conducted in accordance with 
Robert's Rules of Order, as amended, unless otherwise 
specified in this constitution and bylaws. 

■

b.  Order of Business

(1)  Call to Order
(2)  Roll Call
(3)  Adoption of Minutes
(4)  Reports
(5)  Unfinished Business
(6)  New Business
(7)  Adjournment

Sec. 3. Executive Committee Meetings. All meetings of the Executive 
Committee shall be open to tribal members.

a.  Frequency. Meetings of the Executive Committee 
shall be held monthly or as may be fixed by resolution 
of the Executive Committee.

b.  Quorum. Three (3) members of the Executive
Committee shall constitute a quorum at all Executive
Committee meetings.

c.  Meeting Notice. An appropriate written notice 
shall be given to each Executive Committee member 
by the Secretary unless a regular time is specified 
by an Executive Committee resolution.

d.  Absences from regular meetings must be excused by 
a majority vote of the Committee members present.
Two (2) successive or a total of three (3) unexcused 
absences in one (1) year may be sufficient cause 
to remove a Committee member from office. The decision 
will be left up to a majority of the Executive 
Committee.

e.  Special or Emergency Meetings. Special or emergency 
meetings of the Executive Committee may be called by 
the Chairman or by any three (3) members of the Executive 
Committee. The notice in regard to any special or 
emergency meeting shall be given verbally in person, 
or by telephone, or by written notice to each Executive 
Committee member as early as possible prior to the 
meeting, stating the purpose of the meeting. The order 
of business as required by Section 2 (b) of Article XII, 
may be waived if necessary in dealing with emergency 
matters.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SAVINGS CLAUSE AND REPEAL OF PREVIOUS CONSTITUTION

 
 Section 1. The Constitution and Bylaws of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas 
and Nebraska approved on February 26, 1937, as amended in 1960 and 1961, 
under the provisions of Section 16 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (84 
Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378), 
is hereby repealed and superseded by this constitution and bylaws.

Sec. 2. All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the 
Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska shall remain in full force and effect 
to the extent they are consistent with this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provisions of this constitution and bylaws shall, in the future, 
be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid 
provisions shall be severed and the remaining provisions shall continue 
in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of 
the qualified voters of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska voting 
in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall become effective 
until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment at the request of the General 
Council, the Executive Committee, or upon receipt of a petition of 
at least one hundred (100) qualified voters of the Iowa Tribe of 
Kansas and Nebraska. The amendment election shall be authorized 
by the Secretary of the Interior and conducted pursuant to his 
regulations set forth in 25 CFR 52.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI  - ADOPTION

 
 Section 1. This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the Iowa Tribe of Kansas and Nebraska, 
voting at an election called for that propose by the Secretary of 
the Interior, in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled 
to vote shall cast their ballots, shall be submitted to the Secretary 
of the Interior for his approval, and shall be effective from the 
date of his approval.

