 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
of the  
 
JACKSON BAND OF MIWUK INDIANS 
 
 Jackson Rancberia 
Amador County, California
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We the people of the Jackson Band of Miwuk Indians, 
hereinafter referred to as the Band, in order to establish a 
tribal governing body through which we may effectively exercise 
our governmental powers and privileges and preserve and maintain 
our unique cultural and ethnic heritage, do hereby ordain and 
establish this Constitution pursuant to the Indian Reorganization 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

ARTICLE I. 
 
 

TERRITORY

 
 The territorial jurisdiction of the Band shall extend to all 

lands within the boundaries of the Jackson Rancheria in Amador 
County, State of California, as acquired on January 7, 1895, 
pursuant to the Appropriations Act of March 3, 1893 (27 Stat. 
628), and to any other lands to which the Band may hereafter 
acquire legal or beneficial title.

ARTICLE II. MEMBERSHIP

Section 1. Eligibility for Membership. The existing 
membership of the Band at the time of the approval of this 
Constitution, which shall constitute the base roll, is as 
follows:

Margaret Dalton 
Gary Marks 
Irvin Marks 
Wanda Wilson 
Nicholas Wilson, a minor 
Xavier Wilson, a minor 
Heather Lenert, a minor 
Alfred Wilson 
Ashley Wilson, a minor 
Richard Kesler Jr. 
Richard Allen Kesler III, a minor

LaTonya Kesler, a minor 
Allen Richard Kesler, a minor 
Richard Kesler Sr. 
Wilma Kesler 
Dennis Dalton 
Donna McKean 
Sheri McKean 
Lloyd McKean Jr. 
Adam Dalton Sr. 
Tessie Dalton, a minor 
Adam Dalton Jr., a minor 
Cheryl Ann Wilson 
Anthony Kesler 
Wilson Ray Wilson, a minor 
Earl Dalton Jr. 
Earl Dalton III, a minor 
Derik Dalton, a minor 
Robert Dalton 
Robert Dalton Jr., a minor 
Clarence Marks Jr.

Thereafter, lineal descendants of the above listed Band 

member, born after the approval of this Constitution, are 
eligible for membership in the Band, provided that (a) if an 
otherwise eligible person is born to parents who are not 
residents of the Rancheria or Amador County, California, at the 
time of the person's birth, said person shall not be eligible for 
membership unless or until he or she has resided on the Jackson 
Rancheria or in Amador County for a total of five (5) years; (b) 
the procedures and requirements established in any ordinance 
adopted pursuant to section 3 of this Article are satisfied, and 
(c) the General Council approves the membership application.

Section 2. Dual Enrollment. Any person who officially 

enrolls in or is now a recognized member of a federally 
recognized Indian Tribe other than the Jackson Band of Miwuk 
Indians, or who has received an allotment on another Reservation 
or Rancheria, shall not be eligible for membership in the Jackson 
Band of Miwuk Indians. A recognized member of another Tribe 
includes any person who has received benefits from such Tribe in 
the form of payments or other distribution of tribal property; 
provided, however, that any interest in tribal property or an 
allotment that a person may acquire by gift, purchase, devise, or 

inheritance shall not of itself be considered conclusive evidence 
of membership in another Tribe or grounds for ineligibility for 
membership in the Jackson Band of Miwuk Indians. A Band member 
may relinquish membership in the Band, provided that any member 
who does so shall thereafter be ineligible for membership.

Section 3. Enrollment Ordinance. The General Council 

shall adopt an enrollment ordinance, consistent with this 
Constitution, establishing standards and procedures for 
membership in the Band, including but not limited to application 
and approval process, residency requirements, revocation and 
relinquishment of membership, adoption of members who are adopted 
children of members eligible under section 1 of this Article; 
provided that such adopted children shall not be eligible to vote 
or receive monetary benefits of membership, and the preparation 
and maintenance of a tribal membership roll. Any such ordinance 
shall specify the kind of evidence of eligibility for membership 
that is acceptable, and may require a blood test to verify 
paternity in the case of any applicant born out of wedlock. Any 
such ordinance shall provide for notice and opportunity for a 
hearing for each applicant or party affected by an application 
for membership, and shall also provide a method of appealing any 
decision to approve or deny an application for membership to the 
General Council. The General Council shall have the authority to 
make additions, deletions, and corrections to the membership 
roll.

ARTICLE III.  GOVERNING BODY

Section 1. 

The governing body of the Band shall be the 

Tribal Council, which shall consist of five (5) tribal members 
elected from the General Council. The Tribal Council shall 
consist of a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary-Treasurer, 
and two (2) members, each elected by the qualified voters in an 
election held in accordance with this Constitution.

Section 2. 

The General Council shall consist of all 

members of the Band who are eighteen (18) years of age or older. 
The General Council shall exercise its powers through election of 
the Tribal Council, referendum, initiative, constitutional 
amendment, and such other powers as may be reserved to it by this 
Constitution.

ARTICLE IV. 
 
 

ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. The officers of the Jackson Band of Miwuk 

Indians in office at the time of approval of this Constitution, 
shall hold office for the terms set out herein and their 
successors are duly elected and installed at an election to be 
scheduled and conducted by the Election Committee pursuant to an 
election ordinance. Members of the Tribal Council shall each 
serve a term of four (4) years, except that for the first 
election after approval of this Constitution, the Vice
Chairperson and one Council member shall be elected to two (2) 
year terms. Thereafter, elections of Tribal Council members shall 
be held every other year on a staggered basis. The time and 
procedures for said elections shall be included in the election 
ordinance enacted pursuant to Section 5 of this Article.

Section 2. 

Any enrolled member of the Band who is at 

least eighteen (18) years of age as of the date of an election 
shall be entitled to vote in that election, and to run for and 
hold any office.

Section 3. 

In the event that no candidate is nominated 

for a particular office, the incumbent shall continue to serve 
therein until the next election. If there is no incumbent, the 
tribal Chairperson shall have the power to appoint a qualified 
voter of the General Council to such vacant office. If the vacant 
office is that of tribal Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson shall 
serve as Chairperson until the election of a successor.

The Chairperson, or any other officer or Tribal Council 
member serving as Chairperson during a General Council meeting at 
which an election takes place, shall not be disqualified from 
voting in any election, but shall be disqualified from chairing 
any portion of a meeting that directly affects an election in 
which the Chairperson or other officer or Tribal Council member 
is a candidate.

Section 4. 

The candidate receiving the highest number of 

votes for a particular office shall be elected to that office.

Section 5. 

Within thirty (30) days following the 

approval of this Constitution, the General Council shall enact an 
election ordinance, consistent with this Constitution,

prescribing procedures for nominations, fair elections, general 
and special elections, secret ballots, absentee balloting, 
settlement of election disputes, handling of petitions and timely 
verification of signatures thereon, and the conduct of 
referendum, initiative and recall elections.

ARTICLE V. VACANCIES, REMOVAL, AND RECALL

SECTION 1. Vacancies. Whenever a Tribal Council 
position becomes vacant, through death, resignation, removal, 
recall, or any other means, and less than twelve (12) months 
remain of the term of that position, the Tribal Council shall, by 
a majority vote, fill the vacancy by appointment from among 
qualified tribal members. If more than twelve (12) months remain 
of an unexpired term, a special election shall be called to fill 
the vacancy.

SECTION 2. Removal. The Tribal Council may remove a 

member by a majority vote for any of the following reasons: 
provided, however, that such member shall be disqualified from 
voting on the removal action, but shall be entitled to present 
argument and evidence on his or her own behalf at duly noticed 
meeting:

a. 

If a Council member is absent from three (3) 

consecutive regular Tribal Council meetings without satisfactory 
excuse, or is absent without satisfactory excuse from four (4) 
regular Tribal Council meetings in any twelve (12) month period; 
or

b. 

If a sitting member of the Tribal Council is 

convicted by a court of competent jurisdiction of a crime 
involving dishonesty; or

c. 

If a Council member has committed acts which are 

contrary to the best interests of the Band or has otherwise 
abused the powers or privileges of his or her office.

Section 3. Recall. Not later than ten (10) days after 

receipt and verification of a petition seeking the recall of any 
member or members of the Tribal Council, which is signed by at 
least forty percent (40%) of the qualified voters of the Band, 
the Tribal Chairperson shall call a special election on the 

question of the recall, to be held within thirty (30) days. The 
election shall be held in the manner prescribed in the Band's 
election ordinance mandated by Article IV., Section 5 of this 
Constitution. Should the Tribal Chairperson fail to call an 
election within ten (10) days of the recall petition, the 
election shall be called by the recall petitioners. Failure by 
the Chairperson to call an election under this section shall be 
considered grounds for removal from office.

The decision of a majority of the voters voting in the 
recall election shall be final, provided that at least fifty-one 
percent (51%) of the qualified voters vote in the election. Any 
position that becomes vacant as a result of a recall election 
shall be filled in the manner provided in Article V., Section 1 
hereof.

ARTICLE VI. POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The Tribal Council shall 
exercise the following powers and responsibilities, subject only 
to those limitations imposed by this Constitution and applicable 
federal law;

a. 

To negotiate, contract or conclude agreements with 

federal, state, local and tribal governments, private entities 
and individuals on behalf of the Band; to consult the Department 
of the Interior on all activities of the Department which might 
affect the Band or the Jackson Rancheria; and to advise the 
Secretary of the Interior and other federal agencies and 
officials regarding all federal activities that benefit or 
otherwise affect the Band, the Rancheria, or its members;

b. 

To promote the health, education and general welfare of 

the Band and its members, and to administer charitable and such 
other services as may contribute to the social and economic 
advancement of the Band and its members;

c. 

To encourage and foster the traditions and culture of 
the Band, including but not limited to its arts, crafts, music, 
language, and ceremonial practices;

d. 

To create and maintain a reasonable tribal fund for 

administrative expenses of the Band and to provide for 

remuneration of Tribal Council members and tribal officials as 
may be required; to administer any funds or property within the 
control of the Band for the benefit of the Band and its members; 
to allocate tribal funds as loans or grants; and to transfer 
tribal property and other assets to tribal organizations for such 
use as the Tribal Council may determine to be appropriate;

e. 

To provide for the levying of taxes and fees, and for 

the licensing of business, commercial, and other activities by 
any and all persons subject to the Band's jurisdiction;

f. 

To appropriate available Band funds for public and 

other lawful purposes;

g. 

To borrow money and provide for the repayment thereof; 

to manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Band;

h. 

To create tribally-owned or chartered corporations or 

other business entities;

i. 

To employ and discharge tribal employees;

j. 

To promulgate and enforce ordinances and resolutions 

providing for the manner of making, holding and revoking 
assignments to the lands of the Jackson Rancheria;

k. 

To protect the public health, safety, and general 

welfare on all lands of the Band;

1. 

To promulgate and enforce ordinances and resolutions 

providing for the exclusion of persons from Band lands;

m. 

To initiate, approve, grant, reject, or prevent any 

acquisition, disposition, lease, encumbrance, condemnation, or 
alienation of tribal lands, property, assets, or any interest 
therein, and to seek the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior when required by law;

n. 

To acquire lands or interests therein on behalf of the 

Band, to pledge newly-purchased lands as security for loans on 
such lands, and to request that the Secretary of the Interior 
accept lands in trust for the Band;

o. 

To manage, protect and preserve all lands, minerals, 

wildlife and other natural resources of the Jackson Band of Miwuk 
Indians; and to initiate and administer land development projects 
for the Jackson Band of Miwuk Indians on the Jackson Rancheria 
and other lands;

p. 

To choose and employ legal counsel and other 
professional consultants and representatives, and to fix fees for 
such counsel, consultants and representatives, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his or her delegate 
as required by law;

q. 

To initiate such administrative proceedings or legal 

action on behalf of the Band as may be necessary to protect the 
interests of the Band and its members;

r. 

To establish or associate with tribal or inter-tribal 

court systems, or consortia or other Indian organizations now 
existing or yet to be formed for the purpose of exercising the 
Band's jurisdiction and protecting the rights and interests of 
the Band's members under the Indian Child Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C. 
1901 et seg.;

s. 

To establish a judicial system, law enforcement 

capacity and fire protection district for the Band, consistent 
with applicable law;

t. 

To create and regulate subordinate boards, committees, 

or other organizations; to appoint non-members of the Band to 
non-voting, advisory positions when the Council determines that a 
particular expertise is necessary; to delegate to such 
organizations, or to any subordinate boards or officials of the 
Band, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review 
and rescind any action taken under such delegation;

u. 

to take action, including emergency action, on any and 

all subjects as the interests and activities of the Band may 
require that are not inconsistent with this Constitution.

Section 2. General Powers; Sovereign Immunity. The 

Tribal Council shall have all appropriate powers necessary to 
implement specific provisions of this Constitution and to 
effectively govern the affairs of the Band, including powers and 

authorities necessary to protect the interests of the Band in 
times of emergency. All other powers heretofore vested in the 
Band and not specifically referred to this Constitution are 
reserved to the General Council, and may be exercised through 
decision of the General Council, initiative, referendum, or 
appropriate amendment to this Constitution. In particular, the 
Tribal Council is authorized to negotiate waivers of the Band's 
sovereign immunity from unconsented lawsuit, but no such waiver 
shall be effective unless the intent to so waive immunity, and 
the extent to which it shall be waived, is clearly stated in 
writing and approved by the Tribal Council pursuant to a duly 
called meeting.

ARTICLE VII. MEETINGS

Section 1. Tribal Council Meetings.

a. 

Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Tribal 

Council shall be held once a month at a place and time designated 
by the Tribal Council.

b. 

Special Meetinqs. Special meetings of the Tribal 

Council may be called by the Chairperson at his or her 
discretion, and shall be called by the Chairperson within three 
(3) days upon receipt of a petition signed by three (3) Council 
members, provided that the reason for the meeting is stated in 
the petition. Upon refusal of the Chairperson to call a special 
meeting, the petitioners may proceed to call and conduct the 
special meeting, provided that quorum is present. Three (3) days 
written notice shall be given of each special meeting.

c. 

Quorum and Voting. No business shall be transacted at 
any meeting of the Tribal Council unless a quorum is present. A 
quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of three (3) of the 
five (5) members. All actions of the Tribal Council shall be 
approved by a majority of those present and voting.

d. 

Order of Business. The order of business at special 
meetings shall be as stated in the notice or petition by which 
the meeting is called. The order of business at regular meetings 
shall be as follows:

(1)  Call to order;

(2)  Roll call;
(3)  Ascertainment of quorum;
(4)  Approval of agenda;
(5)  Reading, correction, and approval of minutes of 

previous meeting;
(6)  Unfinished business;
(7)  Officers' and Committees' reports;
(8)  New business; and
(9)  Adjournment.

Section 2. General Council Meetings.

a. 

Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the General

Council shall be held annually in January of each year.

b. 

Special Meetings. Special meetings of the General

Council shall be held for the purpose of conducting any special 
election or considering any issue. Special meetings may be called 
in the discretion of the Chairperson or Tribal Council, and shall 
be called by the Chairperson within three (3) days upon receipt 
and verification of a petition signed by three (3) Tribal Council 
members or by thirty percent (30%) of the members of the General 
Council, provided that the reason for the meeting is stated in 
the petition. Upon refusal of the Chairperson to call a special 
meeting, the petitioners may proceed to call and conduct the 
special meeting, provided that a quorum is present. Three (3) 
days written notice shall be given of each special meeting.

c. 

Quorum. No business shall be transacted at any 

meeting of the General Council unless a quorum is present. A 
quorum shall consist of a majority of the members, provided that 
once a quorum has been established, the General Council may 
continue to transact business so long as at least thirty percent 
(30%) of the members thereof are in attendance at the meeting.

d. 

Order of Business. The order of business at a meeting 

of the General Council shall be set forth in the notice or 
petition by which the meeting is called.

Section 3. Emergencies; Telephone Meetings. Any other 

provision of this Constitution notwithstanding, in cases where 
emergency action of the Tribal Council is required, and it is not 
reasonably possible either to meet the written notice 

requirements for conducting a meeting or to convene a quorum, the 
Tribal Chairperson may by telephone contact establish a quorum 
and ascertain the vote of a Tribal Council member on a particular 
issue, provided that any such member so contacted by the 
Chairperson shall confirm his or her vote by means of a signed 
confirmation form to be submitted to the tribal offices as soon 
as reasonably possible after the meeting or vote for which such 
member authorizes his or her vote.

ARTICLE VIII. DUTIES OF OFFICERS

Section 1. Tribal Chairperson. The Chairperson shall 

preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council and of the General 
Council. The Chairperson shall be a full voting member of the 
Tribal Council, but may vote at General Council meetings only to 
break: a tie, except in elections of candidates, in which case the 
conduct of the Chairperson is governed by Article IV, Section 3 
hereof. The Chairperson shall execute on behalf of the Band all 
contracts, leases or other documents approved by the Tribal 
Council or the General Council. The Chairperson shall have 
general supervision of all other tribal officers, employees and 
committees of the Band, and shall see that their duties are 
properly performed. Between sessions of the Tribal Council, the 
Chairperson shall be the official representative of and 
spokesperson for the Band.

Section 2. Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson 

shall assist the Chairperson when called upon to do so. In the 
absence or incapacity of the Chairperson, the Vice-Chairperson 
shall preside over meetings of the Tribal Council and General 
Council, and in that capacity shall be entitled to exercise all 
of the responsibilities of the Tribal Chairperson.

Section 3. Secretary-Treasurer. The Secretary

Treasurer shall be responsible for the following: keeping and 
filing all tribal correspondence; making and transcribing a 
complete and accurate record of all matters transacted at 
meetings of the Tribal Council and General Council; attesting to 
the accuracy of all ordinances, resolutions or other enactments 
of the Tribal Council or the General Council, and serving as 
acting Chairperson when both the Chairperson and the Vice
Chairperson are incapacitated or unavailable. The Secretary
Treasurer shall accept, receive, preserve and safeguard all funds 

in the custody of the Band or the Tribal Council, and shall 
account therefor in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles. All such funds shall be deposited in such bank or 
banks or other repository as may be directed by the Tribal 
Council, and shall not be paid out or disbursed except upon 
proper authorization by the Tribal Council. The books of account 
and other records maintained by the Secretary-Treasurer shall be 
audited at least once per year by a competent auditor. The 
Secretary-Treasurer shall be bonded at the expense of the Band.

Section 4. Appointed Officers. The duties of all 

appointed officers or committees shall be clearly defined by the 
Tribal Council when, and in the enactment by which, such officers 
are appointed. Such officers or committees shall report on their 
activities and decisions as directed by the Tribal Council, and 
such actions and decisions shall be subject to the review and 
approval of the Tribal Council. Consistent with Article VI, 
Section 1(t) hereof, the Tribal Council may appoint non-members 
of the Band to non-voting, advisory positions on any subordinate 
entity of the Band when the Tribal Council determines that the 
particular expertise of such non-members would be beneficial to 
the functions of the entity to which they are to be appointed.

Section 5. Oath of Office. Each member of the Tribal 

Council elected or appointed under this Constitution, or any 
resolution or ordinance enacted pursuant thereto, shall take an 
oath of office before assuming the duties thereof, by which oath 
he or she shall pledge to support and defend the Constitution of 
the Jackson Band of Miwuk Indians. The oath shall be as follows:

"I, ____________________________________________________

, do 
solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of 
the Jackson Band of Miwuk Indians; that I will faithfully and 
impartially carry out the duties of my office to the best of my 
ability; and that I will cooperate with, promote and protect the 
best interests of the Band and its members, in accordance with 
this Constitution."

ARTICLE IX. REFERENDUM AND INITIATIVE

Section 1. 

Referendum. The Tribal Council shall, upon 
receipt and verification by the Secretary-Treasurer of a petition 
signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters, 

submit any enacted or proposed Band legislation to a referendum 
of the eligible voters. The decision of a majority of the voters 
voting in the referendum shall be final, provided that at least 
fifty-one percent (51%) of the qualified voters cast ballots. 
The Tribal Council shall call the referendum within thirty (30) 
days from the date of the receipt of a valid petition. The vote 
in the referendum shall be by secret ballot.

Section 2. Initiative. The General Council of the 

Band reserves the power independently to propose legislation for 
the Band. Any proposed initiative measure shall be presented to 
the Tribal Council accompanied by a petition signed by at least 
thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters. Upon receipt and 
verification of such a petition by the Secretary-Treasurer, the 
Tribal Council shall call a special election for the purpose of 
allowing the members of the Band to vote on the initiative 
measure. The election shall be held within thirty (30) days 
after receipt and verification of the petition therefor by the 
Secretary-Treasurer. The result of the initiative election shall 
be final, provided that at least fifty-one percent (51%) of the 
eligible voters cast ballots.

Section 3. Limitations on Initiative and Referendum.
The Tribal Council shall have the power to decline to call a 

special election on any proposed initiative or referendum which 
was rejected by the voters within the twelve (12) month period 
preceding the submission of the petition therefor.

ARTICLE X. BILL OF RIGHTS

Neither the Tribal Council nor the General Council shall 

exercise any powers in such a manner as to deprive any person of 
rights secured by this Constitution or applicable laws of the 
United States, including the provisions of the Indian Civil 
Rights Act, 25 U.S.C. 1302.

ARTICLE XI. SEVERABILITY

If any provision of this Constitution shall in the future be 

declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the 
invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the 

remaining provisions shall to the maximum extent possible 
continue in full force and effect.

ARTICLE XII. AMENDMENT

Section 1. This Constitution may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Band voting in an 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior 
or his authorized representative, provided that at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 
election. Any amendment hereto shall become effective upon 
approval by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

Section 2. 

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the

Interior to call an election on any proposed amendment at the 
request of the Tribal Council or the General Council of the 
Jackson Band of Miwuk Indians.

ARTICLE XIII. ADOPTION

This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the 

qualified voters of the Band voting at an election called for 
that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior in which at least 
thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall 
be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, 
and shall be effective from the date of his approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Sacramento Area Director, Bureau of 
Indian Affairs, on August 8, 1996, the Constitution of the Jackson Band of Miwuk Indians, 
Jackson Rancheria, Amador County, California was submitted to the qualified voters of the 
Jackson Rancheria and on 12-4, 1996, adopted/rejected by a vote of 13 for, 
and 0 against and 0 Cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the 14 entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with 
section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 12-4-96
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I Ronald M. Jaeger, Area Director, Sacramento Area 
Office, by virtue of the authority granted to the 
Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended and delegated to the Deputy 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 230 D.M. 2.4, and 
further redelegated by Memorandum of Agreement dated 
August 16, 1994, do hereby approved the Constitution of 
the Jackson Rancheria, Amador County, California. The 
Constitution is effective as of this date, PROVIDED, 
that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 
authorizing any action under this document that would 
be contrary to Federal law.

Date: JAN 27 1997

