 
 CONSTITUTION  
 
OF THE 
KAIBAB BAND OF PAIUTE INDIANS 
OF THE
KAIBAB INDIAN RESERVATION, ARIZONA

PREAMBLE


We, the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians of the Kaibab Indian Reservation, Arizona, 
members of the Southern Paiute Nation, in order to improve and strengthen the 
governing structure of our tribal government, to protect and conserve our tribal 
property and to develop its national resources; to administer justice and to promote 
the welfare of ourselves and our descendants; and to otherwise govern the affairs of 
this band, do ordain and establish this constitution pursuant to the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, which shall govern 
the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians from its effective date. The Constitution and By
laws of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians, approved by the Secretary of the Interior 
on June 15, 1951, and Amendment No. 1 approved May 29, 1965, is hereby 
superseded by this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians shall be the name of this tribe. The word “band” 
as used in this document shall have the same meaning as “Kaibab Band of Paiute 
Indians.”
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. Territory. The territory of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians shall extend 
to all reservation lands and Indian country within the exterior boundaries of the 
Kaibab Indian Reservation as established by Executive Orders of June 11, 1913, and 
July 17, 1917, and to such other lands as may be hereafter acquired by the United 
States in trust, or added thereto by purchase or otherwise, and made a part of the 
reservation.

Section 2. Jurisdiction. The governmental powers, consistent with applicable Federal 
law and this constitution, shall extend to all persons, subject matter and property, 
including natural resources, within the exterior boundaries of the reservation, and any 
other lands held in trust for the band and made a part of the reservation.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1.  The membership of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census rolls of 
the Kaibab Indian Reservation as of January 1, 1940, except those individuals 
who have relinquished membership in the band or have become enrolled as 
members of some other tribe or band.

(b)  All persons who are one-forth (1/4) or more degree Indian blood bom to a 

member of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians who is listed on or is descended 
from a member listed on the January 1, 1940, base roll.

(c) 

All persons who prior to the ratification of this amendment qualified for 
membership under previous membership requirement except those persons 
who voluntarily relinquished membership in the band.

Section 2,  Adoptions.

(a)  Direct descendants of Kaibab Paiute tribal members who are listed on the 

January 1, 1940 base roll may be adopted into the band as members with full 
rights and benefits.

(b) 

Persons of one-forth (1/4) or more degree of Indian blood may be adopted 
into the band with all tribal rights and benefits, except for those benefits 
derived from distribution of judgement monies, including payments paid to 
the band or its members in the past or any judgement payment that may be 
paid to the band or its members in the future.

(c) 

Children of adopted members of the band who are not eligible for enrollment 
under Section 1 (a) and (b) of this article may be adopted in accordance with 
Section 2(a).

(d)  Voting on all petitions for adoption will be accomplished at the annual 

general council meeting; provided that a petition for adoption and supporting 
document as may be required by Section 5 of this article must be received not 
less than ninety (90) days prior to the annual general council meeting. A 
majority of those voting must approve the adoption of any person into the 
band.

Section 3. Appeal. Any person whose application for enrollment is rejected as a 
member of the band under Section I shall have the right to appeal the denial in 
accordance with applicable tribal ordinances. Applicants for enrollment by adoption 
shall have no appeal rights.

Section 4. Membership Roll. The tribal council shall insure that the membership roll 
of the band is kept current.

Section 5. Ordinance. The tribal council shall have the authority to enact ordinances 
containing procedures governing adoption, voluntary relinquishment, future 
membership and loss membership; Provided, that such ordinances are in compliance 
with this constitution.

Section 6. Corrections in Roll. Corrections may be made with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative to the base roll at any time 
including, but not limited to, the addition of the names of persons who were omitted 
from the base roll but who are otherwise eligible for enrollment.

Section 7. Dual enrollment. No person who is or becomes enrolled as a member of 
another tribal entity may be or may become a member of the band. Any person who 
refuses to relinquish membership in such other tribal entity after being notified of 
his/her dual enrollment status shall be subject to disenrollment.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. The band, in exercising powers of self-government, shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging 
the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances;

(b)  Violate the rights of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, 
and effects against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but 
upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

(c) 

Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

(d)  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself or

herself;

(e) 

Take any private property for a public use without just compensation;

(f) 

(g) 

Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public 
trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be 
confronted with the witnesses against him or her, to have compulsory process 
for obtaining witnesses in his or her favor, and at his or her own expense to 
have the assistance of counsel for his or her defense;

Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual 
punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any one (1) offense 
any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of one (1) 
year or a fine of five thousand dollars ($5,000) or both;

(h)  Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or 
deprive any person of liberty or property without due process of laws;

(i) 

(j) 

Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or,

Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the 
right, upon request, to a trail by jury of not less than six (6) persons.
 
 

ARTICLE V - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. Tribal Council. The governing body of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians 
shall be a council known as the Kaibab Paiute Tribal Council.

Section 2. Composition. The tribal council shall consist of a chairman, vice
chairman, and five (5) members.

Section 3. Term of Office.

(a)  At the first election under this constitution, the chairman and vice-chairman 

shall be elected to serve a term of three (3) years. The terms of the five (5) 
tribal council members shall be staggered with one (1) member to serve three 
(3) years; two (2) members to serve two (2) years; and two (2) members to 
serve one (1) year as may be determined by lot. Thereafter, the members of 
the tribal council shall be duly elected to serve for a term of three (3)years.

(b) 

Those members of the tribal council who are in office at the time of the 
adoption of this constitution shall remain in office until the first election held

in October.

(c)  Upon the expiration of the term of office of the members of the tribal council 
who are duly in office at the time of the adoption of this constitution, 
nominations and elections shall be held in accordance with Articles IX and X 
of this constitution.

Section 4. Officers Defined. Officers of the tribal council are the chairman, vice- 
chairman, and treasurer.

(a) 

The chairman and vice-chairman shall be elected by majority vote of the 
ballots cast by eligible voters of the band.

(b) 

The treasurer shall be elected from within the tribal council.

Section 5. Duties of Tribal Officers.

(a) 

Chairman. The chairman of the tribal council shall:

(1) 

Be the executive officer and primary representative of the band;

(2) 

Preside over all meetings of the tribal council and the band;

(3)  Have the power to call special meetings of the tribal council subject to 

Article VII, Section 1(c);

(4) 

Sign all negotiable documents, contracts, applications for Federal or 
other funds authorized by the tribal council;

(5)  Vote only in case of a tie;

(6)  Have the right to express his or her opinion on all issues;

(7) 

Implement and carry out all directives of the tribal council;

(8)  Make written and oral reports at all tribal council meetings of tribal 

activities;

(9) 

Be responsible for general supervision of all tribal employees; and,

(10)  Perform other duties as specified in a delegation of authority as 

established and approved by the tribal council.

(b)  Vice-chairman. The vice-chairman of the tribal council shall assist the 

chairman, and in the absence of the chairman, shall assume the same duties 
and powers of the chairman as specified in Section 5(a) of this article.

(c) 

Treasurer. The treasurer shall:

(1)  Act as chairman in case of absence of the chairman and vice-chairman;

(2) 

Be responsible for the funds of the band;

(3)  Accept, receive, receipt for, preserve, and safeguard all funds in the 

custody of the tribal council;

(4)  Obtain a surety bond as required by the tribal council;

(5) 

Expend funds as authorized by the tribal council;

(6) 

Sign checks which must be countersigned by the chairman or 
designated representative of the chairman; and,

(7)  Delegate duties described in (2) through (6) with approval by the tribal 

council.

(d) 

Secretary. The secretary to the tribal council, who is not a tribal council 
member, shall:

(1)  Record and read minutes of the tribal council meetings;

(2)  Attest all resolutions and ordinances;

(3) 

Preserve all resolutions, ordinances, minutes of the tribal council and 
make them available upon request to band members during regular 
business hours; and,

(4) 

Perform all other such duties as may be required by the office of the 
chairman, vice-chairman, and the tribal council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWER OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The tribal council is authorized to exercise all of the 
powers possessed by the band now and in the future, subject to any limitations 
imposed by the Constitution and Laws of the United States and subject to the 
referendum provisions in Article XII and any other restrictions imposed by this 
constitution, including but not limited to the following:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

To negotiate, consult, and contract with the Federal, State, local, and tribal 
governments, private enterprises, individuals and other organizations for the 
benefit of the band;

To levy taxes and issue licenses upon members and non-members for purposes 
of hunting, fishing, trading or business activities within the reservation;

To regulate hunting, fishing, camping and recreation, trading and business 
activities on the reservation, and to enforce those regulations by appropriate 
ordinances;

To provide by resolution or ordinance the conditions upon which non
members may enter or remain on the reservation and for the removal or 
exclusion of non-members from the reservation whose presence may be 
injurious to the tribal members or to the interest of the band;

(e) 

To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors, mental incompetent 
and the adoption of minor children by ordinances or resolution;

(f) 

To plan and approve all economic affairs and enterprises of the band;

(g) 

(h) 

To create, regulate, charter, appoint and oversee independent organizations, 
subordinate organizations and committees of the band by ordinances; and to 
review any action taken by virtue of such delegated powers or to delegate 
powers as appropriate, retaining the right to rescind delegated powers;

To promulgate ordinances and resolutions to promote and protect the peace, 
health, education, safety and welfare of the band, its members and all other 
persons within its jurisdiction;

(i) 

To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, 
interests in lands, or other tribal assets which may be authorized or executed

by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative;

(j) 

(k) 

(1) 

To promulgate and enforce civil and criminal ordinances governing the conduct 
of members of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians and providing for the 
maintenance of law and order on the reservation;

To establish tribal courts and prescribe rules for tribal courts and tribal law 
enforcement agencies;

To make appointments for the tribal judicial system pursuant to provisions of 
Article XIII and ordinances enacted pursuant thereto;

(m)  To hire a tribal secretary to record and read minutes of the tribal council 
meetings and perform such other duties as may be assigned by a position 
description;

(n) 

(o) 

To make rules and regulations for the conduct of all tribal elections provided 
for under this constitution; and,

To adopt resolutions regulating the procedures of the tribal council itself and 
of other tribal agencies and tribal officials within its jurisdiction.

Section 2. Secretarial Approval. The tribal council is authorized to exercise these 
powers possessed by the band listed in this section; Provided, that the exercise of such 
powers shall not conflict with Federal law or provisions of the constitution:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and the fixing of fees to be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative so long as such approval is required by Federal law;

To spend tribal funds and trust funds in accordance with an annual budget 
approved by the tribal council by resolutions subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative so long as such 
approval is required by Federal law;

To negotiate and grant permits and leases for business, home sites and other 
purposes for terms of years authorized by Federal law, and said leases to 
be valid only after approval by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative;

(d) 

(e) 

To make corrections to the base roll at any time including, but not limited to, 
the addition of the names of persons who were omitted from the base roll but 
who are otherwise eligible for enrollment, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative; and,

To introduce, possess, sell, transport, and consume alcoholic beverages on the 
Kaibab Indian Reservation by ordinances, subject to the certification and 
publication in the Federal Register by the Secretary of the Interior.

Section 3. Future Powers. The Tribal Council of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians 
may exercise such further powers as may in the future be delegated to it by members 
of the band or the Secretary of the Interior or by any other duly authorized official or 
agency of the State or Federal Government.

Section 4. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Kaibab 
Band of Paiute Indians, but not expressly referred to in this constitution, shall not be 
abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the people of the Kaibab Band 
through the adoption of appropriate constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. The tribal council shall hold meetings and take action in accordance with 
the following procedures, which it may augment by its own rules and procedures so 
long as they do not conflict with any provisions of this constitution.

(a) 

Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the tribal council shall be held each 
month at a time and place designated in an ordinance by the tribal council. 
All regular meetings of the tribal council shall be open to the membership of 
the band. The tribal council, at its discretion, may recess to discuss any 
matter in closed or executive session after which the regular meeting may be 
reconvened. No regular meeting shall commence until a quorum is present 
and in person.

(b)  General Council Meetings. The tribal council shall hold an annual general 

council meeting of the band on the first Saturday in October. The time and 
procedures for the general council meetings shall be determined by the tribal 
council by ordinance and timely notice of the meeting shall be made to the 
general membership. The chairman shall preside over that meeting. No 
business of the general council shall be conducted unless a quorum of the 
eligible voters is present. A quorum shall consist of one-third (1/3) of the

eligible voters.

(c) 

Special Meetings. Special meetings of the tribal council may be called on 
written notice at the discretion of the chairman, but the chairman shall call a 
special meeting upon receipt of a written request by three (3) or more 
members of the tribal council. No special meeting shall be called without 
written notice given to each member of the tribal council at least twenty-four 
(24) hours prior to special meetings, which may be waived by their presence 
at any meeting.

(d)  Agenda. An agenda shall be prepared by the chairman; Provided, that it shall 
include any item submitted upon the written request of two (2) or more 
members of the tribal council. The agenda together with any drafts of 
proposed resolutions or ordinances shall be provided to the members of the 
tribal council not less that twenty-four (24) hours prior to any regularly 
scheduled or special meeting.

(e)  Quorum. Four (4) members of the tribal council shall constitute a quorum. 
Matters of business properly brought before the tribal council shall be 
decided by a majority vote of those present constituting a quorum.

(f)  Minutes. Minutes of regular and special tribal council meetings shall be kept. 
Minutes may be made available for inspection by members of the band upon 
request during regular business hours.

(g)  Order of Business. Meetings of tribal council shall be conducted as follows:
 
 

(I) 

 
 Call to order by the chairman;

(2) 

Roll call and ascertainment of a quorum;

(3)  Reading of minutes of last meeting;

(4) 

Reports;

(5)  Unfinished business;

(6)  New business; and,

(7)  Adjournment.

(h) 

Enactments:

(1)  All final decisions of the tribal council on matters of general and

permanent interest to the members of the band shall be embodied in 
ordinances. The ordinances shall be collected and made available to 
tribal members and others affected upon reasonable request.

(2)  All final decisions of the tribal council on matters of temporary interest 
shall be embodied in resolutions. The resolutions shall be collected and 
made available to tribal members and others affected upon reasonable 
request.

(i) 

Compensation of Tribal Council. The tribal council may prescribe 
compensation for officers or members of the tribal council, as is deemed 
advisable from such funds as may be available, subject to the approval of the 
general membership of the band at the annual October meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - REGISTRATION AND VOTING

 
 Section 1. Voters. All duly enrolled members of the band who are eighteen (18) 
years of age or older are eligible to vote in all band elections.

Section 2. Eligible Voter’s List. The tribal election committee shall keep a current 
list of eligible voters and shall provide complete records of the same to the tribal 
council at least fifteen (15) days before the band election. The list shall be posted for 
inspection by all band members.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - CANDIDATES FOR OFFICE

 
 Section 1. Eligibility of Candidates for Chairman or Vice-Chairman. No person shall 
be a candidate for chairman or vice-chairman of the Kaibab Paiute Tribal Council 
unless that person:

(a) 

Is a duly enrolled member of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians;

(b) 

Is at least twenty-one (21) years of age or older;

(c) 

Has resided on or near the Kaibab Indian Reservation for the last six (6) 
months immediately preceding the election; and,

(d) 

Shall declare his or her candidacy for the office of chairman or vice-chairman 
not later than forty-five (45) days preceding the election.

Section 2. Eligibility of Candidates.

(a) 

Is a duly enrolled member of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians;

(b) 

Is at least twenty-one (21) years of age or older;

(c)  Has resided on or near the Kaibab Indian Reservation for the last six (6) 

months immediately preceding the election; and,

(d) 

Shall declare his or her candidacy for the office of tribal council not later than 
forty-five (45) days preceding the election.

Section 3. Ruling of Candidacy. The tribal election committee established pursuant 
to Section 5 of Article X shall inform prospective candidates within five (5) days of 
submission of his or her name for candidacy whether the candidate is acceptable as 
set forth in Section 1 of this article and election ordinance. It shall be the duty of the 
tribal election committee to post in public places at least thirty (30)days before the 
election the names of all certified candidates for the tribal council.

Section 4. Appeal Rights of Rejected Candidates. Any person who is refused 
candidacy by the tribal election committee may, within five (5) working days of the 
committee’s ruling, appeal the decision to the tribal court. The decision of the tribal 
court on the appeal shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE X - ELECTION

 
 Section I. Tribal Council Election. Elections for the tribal council shall be held 
annually on the first Saturday in October. The time, place and manner of voting 
shall be determined in accordance with procedures contained in the election 
ordinance.

Section 2. Installation. Newly-elected members shall take office at the next regular 
or special meeting of the tribal council upon certification of the election results, but 
no later than ten (10) days after the election. Election results shall be certified within 
five (5) days of the elections is accordance with procedures contained in the election 
ordinance.

Section 3. Oath of Office. Each member of the tribal council and each officer, 
elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an oath of office at their installation 
administered by the tribal chief judge:

I, ________________

, do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the 

Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of the Kaibab Band of Paiute 
Indians; that I will carry out, faithfully and impartially, the duties of my office to the 
best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote and protect the best interest of my 
people, in accordance with this constitution.

Section 4. Election Ordinance, The tribal council shall enact an election ordinance 
governing the conduct of elections. Such ordinance shall be consistent with this 
constitution and shall include, but not be limited to the following provision:

(a) 

Establishment of a tribal election committee;

(b)  Maintenance of a current list of eligible voters;

(c)  Nomination and screening of prospective candidates;

(d)  Secret balloting;

(e)  Absentee voting;

(f)  Determination of a winner in the event of a tie;

(g) 

Settlement of election disputes;

(h) 

Procedures for filing petitions and determining their validity; and,

(i) 

Conduct of referendum, initiative, and recall election.

Section 5. Tribal Election Committee. The tribal council shall appoint an ongoing 
impartial tribal election committee composed of three (3) or more qualified voters to 
conduct all band elections in accordance with this constitution and the election 
ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - VACANCIES, REMOVAL AND FORFEITURE FROM OFFICE

 
 Section I. Vacancy of Office. If any position on the tribal council shall become 

vacant for any reason other than the expiration of the term of office, the tribal 
council shall declare the position vacant and shall appoint an individual to serve in 
that position until the next election at which time an election shall be held to fill the 
unexpired term. Appointment shall be made by the tribal council with preference 
being given to the defeated candidate who received the next highest number of votes 
at the last election.

Section 2. Removal. The tribal council shall, be an affirmative vote of all its 
members of the tribal council except the one being considered for removal, after due 
notice and an opportunity to be heard, remove any member of the tribal council or 
the tribal judiciary who during his term of office is found guilty of a misdemeanor 
involving moral turpitude; gross neglect of duty, malfeasance in office, or misconduct 
reflecting on the dignity and integrity of the tribal government. Before any vote for 
removal is taken, the accused shall be given a written statement of the charges at least 
fifteen (15) days in advance of the hearing. Voting shall be by secret ballot and the 
chairman shall be entitled to vote. No officer or member shall preside over the 
meeting at which said removal is being considered.

Section 3. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of 
the eligible voters of the band demanding the recall of any member or members of the 
tribal council named in said petition;

(a) 

It shall be the duty of the tribal council to direct the tribal election 
committee to call and conduct a recall election which shall be not less than ten 
(10) day and not more than thirty (30) days from the date the petition is 
received by the secretary of the tribal council. Should the tribal council fail 
to act within five (5) days from receipt of a valid petition, the election 
committee shall automatically call and conduct the election.

(b)  No member may be recalled in any such election unless fifty percent (50%) of 
the eligible voters of the band shall vote and a majority of those voting in said 
election vote in favor of such recall. In the event the recall is defeated, no 
petition may be filed for the recall of that member for a period of one (1) 
year. The tribal council shall proceed in the manner prescribed in Section 1 
of this article to fill the vacancy if the recall is successful.

Section 4. Forfeiture. In the event of death, resignation, conviction of a felony while 
in office, or failure to attend four (4) consecutive regular tribal council meetings, a 
tribal council member shall automatically forfeit his or her office and a vacancy shall 
be created. The tribal council shall proceed in the manner prescribed in Section 1 of

this article to fill the vacancy.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1, Tribal Initiative. The eligible voters of the band shall have the right to 
propose legislation and vote by secret ballot to determine whether it will be adopted 
or rejected. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of 
the eligible voters, the secretary to the tribal council shall direct the tribal election 
committee to call an election to be conducted pursuant to the election ordinance no 
later than thirty (30) days after receipt of the valid petition; Provided, that if the next 
regular election is six (6) months or less from the date the petition is filed, the voting 
on the initiative shall take place at that election. The initiative shall be adopted upon 
the affirmative vote of a majority of those voting in said election; Provided, that at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters of the band vote in such election.

Section 2. Tribal Referendum. Upon the request of the majority of the members of 
the tribal council, any enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution of the tribal 
council shall be submitted by the tribal election committee to popular referendum of 
the eligible voters. The eligible voters shall be majority vote, in such referendum, 
decide whether the ordinance or resolution shall thereafter be in effect; Provided, at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters in such referendum.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - JUDICIAL BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT

 
 Section L Tribal Judiciary. The tribal judiciary shall consist of a trial court of general 
jurisdiction and an appellate court.

Section 2. Powers of the Courts. All judicial powers of the band shall be vested in 
the tribal judiciary, including such powers as may in the future be granted or restored 
to the band by any law of the United States of other authority, except as limited by 
this constitution.

Section 3. Jurisdiction. The Judicial power of the court shall extend to all suits in law 
or equity arising under this constitution, tribal ordinances, or a civil and criminal 
code. Decisions of the tribal judiciary shall be binding upon all persons and property 
within the jurisdiction of the band as referenced in Article II. The appellate court of 
the band shall be the final and supreme interpreter of this constitution and tribal 
ordinances.

Section 4.  Term of Office. The tribal council shall appoint persons to fill said 
positions for a term of two (2) years for chief judge, associate judge, and appellate 
judge(s) and may renew said appointments at the expiration of the term.

Section 5.  Qualifications. The judges of the Kaibab Paiute Tribal Court may be any 
person, Indian or non-Indian, from within or without the membership of the band;
Provided, that the following requirements are met:

(a) 

Is twenty-one (21) years of age or older;

(b)  Has never been convicted of a felony, or within one (1) year been convicted of 

a misdemeanor;

(c) 

Is willing to attend training sessions for tribal judges;

(d)  Will abide by an applicable judicial code of ethics; and

(e)  The chief judge and appellate judge must be capable of supervising a staff of

judges, clerks and other personnel.

Section 6.  Removal. No judge shall be removed except for good cause as defined by 
Section 2 of Article XI. Prior to removal, the judge who is the subject of a removal 
action shall receive written notice of the charges five (5) business days prior to a 
hearing before the tribal council to consider removal. At the removal hearing, said 
judge shall have the right to examine witnesses, shall have the right to call witnesses, 
and shall have the right to be represented, at the judge’s own expense, by an 
individual of his/her own choice. An affirmative vote of four (4) members of the 
tribal council shall be required to remove any judge.

Section 7.  Rules of Procedures. The chief judge shall issue rules of pleading, practice, 
and procedure applicable to any and all proceedings of the trial court and appellate 
court, consistent with the provisions of this constitution. Tn the event the chief judge 
fails to establish said rules, the tribal council shall have the authority to establish 
them.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV  - LAND

 
 All lands of the Kaibab Indian Reservation and all lands which may hereafter be 
acquired by the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians or by the United States in trust for 
the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians shall be held as tribal land. No part of such land 

shall be mortgaged or sold, except as may be provided by Federal law. Tribal land 
shall not be allotted to individual Indians, but may, consistent with Federal law, be 
assigned to members of the band, or leased, or otherwise used by the band in 
accordance with such ordinances and resolutions as may be adopted by the tribal 
council.
 
 

ARTICLE XV  - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

 
 Section 1.  The band shall waive its immunity to suit for declaratory and injunctive 
relief in tribal courts by persons subject to tribal jurisdiction for the purpose of 
enforcing rights and duties established by this constitution, by the ordinances of the 
band, and by the Indian Civil Rights Act, 25 U.S.C., Section 1301 and 1302.

Section 2.  The members of the tribal council and employees acting within the scope 
of their authority or employment shall be personally immune from suit, and said 
immunity shall extend beyond their term of office for actions occurring during said 
term.

Section 3.  Except as provided above, the band does not waive its immunity from suit 
in the courts of the band, the United States or of anv state, unless the waiver is 
expressly authorized by a majority of the tribal council in writing.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI  - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION

 
 Section 1. Adoption. This constitution shall become effective when adopted by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters who cast ballots at an election called and 
conducted pursuant to regulations of the Secretary of the Interior for the purpose of 
adopting this constitution; Provided, that at least thirty percent (30%) of those 
registered to vote cast their ballots and the Secretary of the Interior shall have 
approved the same. This constitution shall become effective on the date of such 
approval.

Section 2. Savings Clause. All ordinances, resolutions and other expressions of policy 
of the band of whatever nature predating the effective date of this constitution are 
ratified and continued in full force and effect if such are consistent with this 
constitution.

Section 3. Prior Inconsistent Actions Nullified. All ordinances, resolutions and other 
expressions of policy of the band of whatever nature predating the effective date of 
this constitution that are not consistent with this constitution are superseded to the

extent they are inconsistent with this constitution.

Section 4. Former Constitution and Bylaws. The Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians of Arizona approved June 15, 1951, as amended, is 
hereby superceeded.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII  - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. Amendments to the Constitution. This constitution may be amended by 
a majority vote of the qualified voters of the band who cast ballots in an election 
called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative and conducted pursuant to Federal regulations; Provided, that at least 
thirty percent (30%) of those duly registered to vote shall cast ballots in such 
election; but no amendment shall become effective until it is approved by the   
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative.

Section 2. Election for Amendments. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative to call an election on any proposed 
amendment upon receipt of a resolution adopted by two-thirds (2/3) of the entire 
tribal council or upon receipt of a petition signed by at least twenty-five percent 
(25%) of the eligible voters of the band.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII  - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this constitution shall in the future be declared invalid by a court 
of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the 
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS

 
 Pursuant to an order issued on OCT 30. 1986, by /S/ Ross O. Swimmer,

Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, the foregoing Constitution of the Kaibab Band 

of Paiute Indians of Arizona, was submitted for adoption to the qualified voters of 

the band and was on June 20, 1987, duly adopted/rejected by a vote of

23 for, and 2 against, in an election in which at least thirty percent 

(30%) of the 40 entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with Section 

16 of the Indian Reorganization Act on June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378), and May 1, 1936 (49 Stat. 1250).
 
 

ARTICLE XX - APPROVAL

 
 I, /s/ Ross O. Swimmer, Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs, by virtue of 

the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 

(43 Stat. 934), as amended, and delegated to roe by 209 DM 8.3, do hereby approve 

the Constitution of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians of Arizona. It is effective as 

of this date; provided, that nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing 

. any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Washington, DC

Date: JUL 14, 1987

