Recommendation 1

Enrollment is not a right but a privilege. Each Tribal 
Member who is eligible to vote in tribal elections must 
participate in tribal government at least once annually.

Tribal Member Comments
•  There have been many comments made about tribal members not attending general 

council meetings annually.

•  Tribal member only come to collect their checks but do not participate in any tribal 

functions.

•  We should change the constitution to the days when if you did not show up three (3) 
consecutive years your name would be removed from the official membership roll.

Background:
In the current Constitution there is no language included to cover participation. The 1951 tribal 
Constitution refers to require tribal member participation in government.

Lack of participation also leads to some issues not being ratified because of the lack of a quorum. 
By definition in tribal government means annual, monthly or any committee meeting.

Question to be brought forward to the Membership for consideration:

Should tribal member’s participation be required as in the past?

A YES Vote means:

Would mean that language would be included that defined participation, for instance if they do 
not attend three (3) consecutive general council meetings annually, their name would be removed 
from the official membership roll. They would not be eligible for re-enrollment.

A NO vote means:

Would mean they would not be required to participate in tribal government. There may not be a 
quorum to conduct business annually. There will be no language that includes a required 
participation by eligible voters.

Recommendation 2

Adopt applicants with “Kaibab Paiute” blood only

Tribal Member comments:

•  Kaibab Paiute blood strengthened within future membership; ensure that leadership is by 

a member with Kaibab Paiute blood

•  Changing to Kaibab blood would eventually eliminate the tribe because of its present size 

and the inability to avoid intermarriages

•  Tribal members have expressed their concern that tribal leadership such as the tribal 

chairman could potentially be a non-southern Paiute person and it would be undesirable 
to have a leader with no southern Paiute blood

•  Present Kaibab Paiute enrolled members who do not possess Kaibab Paiute blood could 

be dis-enrolled

Background:

In the present enrollment ordinance, it allows the method of adoption into the tribe as a way to 
establish enrollment. The applicant is able to use other Indian blood and isn’t required to have 
Kaibab Paiute or Southern Paiute blood

Question for Consideration to the Membership:

Should applicants that apply for membership into the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians be of 
Kaibab Paiute descent only?

A YES vote means:

Only applicants that are of Kaibab Paiute descent will be allowed to apply for membership. This 
would mean that future membership of the Kaibab band of Paiute Indians would be of Kaibab 
Paiute descent. This would ensure that all future tribal leaders would possess Kaibab Paiute 
blood. Other Indian blood would be included in the blood quantum but must include Kaibab 
Paiute blood.

A NO vote means:

The tribal constitution would remain the same which includes membership of non-Kaibab 
Paiutes. Applicants who do not have Kaibab Paiute blood would be allowed to apply for 
membership into the band. This would not ensure the tribal leadership would possess Kaibab 
Paiute blood and all members of the Kaibab Band would not be of Kaibab Paiute descent.

Recommendation 3

Adopt applicants with “Southern Paiute” blood only

Tribal Member Comments

•  Tribal Members have expressed their concern that tribal leadership such as the 

tribal chairman could potentially be a non-southern Paiute person and it would be 
undesirable to have a leader with no Southern Paiute blood.

•  Present Kaibab Paiute enrolled member who do not possess “southern Paiute” 

blood could be dis-enrolled

Background:
In the present enrollment ordinance, it allows the method of adoption into the tribe as a way to 
establish enrollment. The applicant is able to use other Indian blood and isn’t required to have 
Southern Paiute blood.

Question for consideration to the membership:

Should applicants that apply for membership into the Kaibab band of Paiute Indians be of 
Southern Paiute descent only?

A YES vote means:

Only applicants that are of “Southern Paiute” descent will be allowed to apply for membership. 
This would mean that the future membership of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians would be of 
“Southern Paiute” descent. This would ensure that all future leaders would possess “southern 
Paiute” blood. Other Indian blood would be included in the blood quantum but must include 
“southern Paiute” blood.

A NO vote means:

The Tribal Constitution would remain the same which includes membership of non-southern 
Paiutes. Applicants who are non-southern Paiute would be allowed to apply for membership into 
the Band. This would not ensure that tribal leaders would possess Southern Paiute blood and all 
members of the Kaibab Band would not be of Southern Paiute descent.

Recommendation 4

The adoption section in the constitution will be removed in 
its entirety. Therefore, enrollment would be by descendent 
only.

Tribal Member Comments:

•  Adoptees that have no Kaibab Paiute blood are not seen at tribal functions or events. 

Adoptees at present can run for tribal office, and have full rights and benefits.

•  Adoptees who never came to Kaibab became enrolled once the tribe started receiving per 

capita.

Background:

Automatic enrollees resent that adoptees receive full right and benefits

Question for consideration to the membership:

Should the adoption section be stricken from the Tribal Constitution?

A YES vote means:

Only applicants with direct descendency would be eligible for enrollment. Non-Kaibab Paiute 
applications for enrollment would not be accepted. Applicants with less than 1/4 Kaibab blood 
would be eligible for enrollment through direct descendency. This eliminates other Indian 
blood. But applicant may not be eligible for BIA and IHS services due to federal eligibility 
regulations.

A NO vote means:

Adoptions would remain in the constitution. Eliminates the use of other Indian blood for blood 
quantum, though a person with less than 1/4 degree of Indian blood would be eligible for BIA and 
IHS services due to the federal eligibility regulations

Recommendation 5

No rights or limited rights for adoptees

Tribal member Comments

There were some tribal Members who felt that adoptees should have no rights
• 
There were those members who were okay with limited rights for adoptees
• 
•  Only Southern Paiute would be eligible for benefits, limit the rights of those with no 

Southern Paiute blood

Background:

In the present Constitution adoptees are eligible for all tribal rights and benefits except those 
benefits derived from distribution of judgment monies.

Question Consideration to the Membership:

Should adoptees continue to have full rights and benefits as stated in the current constitution?

A YES vote means:

The Adoptee enrollee would be eligible for all tribal rights and benefits, except from those 
benefits derived from Judgement monies.

A NO vote means:

The Adoptee enrollee would not be eligible for all tribal rights and benefits, but may be eligible 
for IHS and BIA if qualified.

Recommendation 6
 
 

NO CHANGE TO THE TRIBAL CONSTITUTION

 
 