 
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS  
 
OF THE 
KAIBAB BAND OF PAIUTE INDIANS
OF THE

KAIBAB RESERVATION, ARIZONA

PREAMBLE


We the members of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians in order to 

show our gratefulness to Almighty God, and to improve ourselves in the 
art of civilization and provide a means of orderly transaction of tribal 
business and the free expression of the tribal will, do ordain and 
establish this Constitution and Bylaws for the Paiute Indians on the 
Kaibab Reservation of the State of Arizona, henceforth to be known as 
the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
  The jurisdiction of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians shall extend 

to the territory within the confines of the Kaibab Indian Reservation as 
established by Executive Orders of June 11, 1913 and July 17, 1917, and 
to such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto by purchase or 
otherwise.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians 

shall be governed by the following provisions:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

allotment rolls of the Kaibab Indian Reservation, shall be members of 
the Band: Provided, that the Tribal Council shall have power to revise 
said roll with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his 
authorized representative.

(b)  A member who remains away from the reservation continuously 

for a period of twenty (20) years shall automatically forfeit his member
ship but if he returns to the Reservation he may be reinstated by a 
majority vote of the Council of the Band.

(c)  Any descendent of a member possessing one-quarter degree or

more of Indian blood shall be entitled to membership in the Band, but 
any such descendent having less than this degree of Indian blood may be 
admitted to membership by a majority vote of the eligible voters of the 
Band.

(d)  Persons of one-quarter or more degree of Indian blood marrying 

members of the Kaibab Band maybe adopted into the tribe by a three- 
fourths vote of the eligible voters of the Band.

(e)  No persons other than those enumerated in this article may be 

adopted as members of the Band. 

(f) The Tribal Council shall have power to promulgate ordinances, 

subtext to approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative regulating the procedure of adoption into membership.
 
 

ARTICLE IH - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1.  The governing body of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians 

shall consist of a council, known as the Tribal Council.

Section 2.  The Tribal Council shall consist of six members duly 

elected to serve for a period of three years, two members being elected 
each year, except that in the initial election the two candidates receiving 
the highest number of votes shall serve for three years; the two candi
dates receiving the next highest number of votes shall serve for two 
years, and the two candidates receiving the next highest number shall 
serve for one year.

Section 3.  Thereafter members of the Council shall serve for 

three (3) years and one-third of the membership of the Council shall be 
elected each year on the day and month provided in Section 5.

Section 4.  The Tribal Council shall elect from within its own 

membership (a) a Chairman, (b) a Vice-Chairman, and from within or 
without its own membership (c) a Secretary-Treasurer, and such other 
officers and committees as may be deemed necessary.

. 

The Chairman shall vote only in the event of a tie.
 
 

 
 
 
 Section 5.  The election of Council members .shall be held on the 

first Wednesday in October.

Section 6.  All elections shall be by secret ballot and shall be held 

in accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Tribal 
Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 1. If a Tribal Council member shall die, resign, per

manently leave the reservation, or be removed for cause, the Council 
shall declare the position vacant and appoint a successor to serve until 
the annual general tribal council meeting in October, at which time the 
general tribal council shall elect a successor for the unexpired term.

Section 2. Upon receipt of a petition signed by one-third of the 

eligible voters of the Band demanding the recall of any member or 
members of the Tribal Council named in said petition, it shall be the 
duty of the Council to call an election on such recall petition. No member 
may be recalled in any such election unless at least 30 percent of the 
eligible voters of the Band shall vote at such an election. In the event 
the majority of those voting in such election favor a recall from office, 
the office shall be declared vacant and the Council shall proceed in 
the manner prescribed in Section 1 of this article to fill the vacancy.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The Tribal Council of the Kaibab 

Band of Paiute Indians shall exercise the following powers, subject tp 
any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States:

(a)  To negotiate with Federal, State, and local governments on 

behalf of the Band.

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative.

(c)  To veto the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of the 

tribal lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 

representative of its wishes with regard to Federal projects, 
or appropriations for the benefit of the Band.

(e)  To appoint subordinate boards and officers and to prescribe 

their duties and powers.

(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative, governing the conduct of members of the Band; 
providing for the levying of taxes and the appropriation of 
available funds of the Band for public purposes; providing for 
the licensing of non-members coming upon the reservation for 
purposes of hunting, fishing, trading or other business; and 
for the exclusion from the reservation of persons not legally 
entitled to reside thereon.

(g)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinance or resolution, subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(h)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, 

to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate 
board or officials of the Band, any of the foregoing powers, 
reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of 
such delegated powers.

(i)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Band 

in accordance with the terms of a Charter which may be issued 
to the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(j)  To protect the public health and morals and to provide for public 

welfare.

(k)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution and 
Bylaws regulating the procedure of the Tribal Council and of 
the organizations of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians.

Section 2. Further Powers. The Tribal Council may exercise such 

further powers as may in the future be delegated to it by the Secretary of 
the Interior or by any other duly authorized official or agency of the State 
or Federal Government.

Section 3. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore 

vested in the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians but not expressly referred to 
in this Constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may be 
exercised by the members of the Band through the adoption of appropriate 
bylaws and constitutional amendments.

Section 4. Manner of Review. Any resolution or ordinance which by 

the terms of this Constitution shall be subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior shall be presented to the Superintendent of the reservation 
within fifteen days after its enactment. The Superintendent shall, within 
ten days after its receipt, approve or disapprove same. If the Superin
tendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon 
become effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the 
same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who 
may, within ninety days from date of enactment, rescind the said 
ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying the Tribal Council 
of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him within ten days after its receipt he shall 
advise the Council of his reasons therefor. If these reasons appear to 
the Council insufficient, it may by majority vote, refer the ordinance or 
resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety days 
from the date of its enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon 
the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1.  Suffrage. Any member of the Kaibab Band of Paiute 
Indians twenty-one (21) years of age or over, who has maintained legal

residence on the reservation for one year immediately preceding any 
election, shall be eligible to vote for election to office therein.

Section 2.  Economic Rights. All members of the Band shall be 

accorded equal opportunity to participate in the economic resources and 
activities of the reservation.

Section 3.  Civil Liberties. All members of the Band shall enjoy 

without hinderance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, 
assembly and association.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - LAND

 
 All lands of the Kaibab Reservation and all lands which may 

hereafter be acquired by the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians or by the 
United States in trust for the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians, shall be 
held as tribal land and no part of such land shall be mortgaged or sold. 
Tribal land shall not be allotted to individual Indians, but may be assigned 
to members of the Tribe, or leased, or otherwise used by the Band in 
accordance with such ordinances and resolutions as may be adopted by 
the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by majority vote of 

the qualified voters of the Band, voting at an election called for that 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior; Provided, that at least 30 
percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; but no 
amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment at the request of two-thirds of the 
members of the Tribal Council, or upon presentation of a petition signed 
by one-fourth of the qualified voters, members of the Kaibab Band of 
Paiute Indians.


BYLAWS OF THE KAIBAB BAND OF PAIUTE INDIANS 

OF THE KAIBAB RESERVATION, ARIZONA

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 1.  Chairman of the Tribal Council. The Chairman of the 

Tribal Council shall preside over all meetings of the Tribal Council, 
shall perform all duties of the Chairman and exercise any authority 
delegated to him by the Tribal Council. The Chairman shall also 
preside at all meetings of the Band. He shall have no vote, except as 
provided in Article HI, Section 4.

Section 2.  The Vice-Chairman of the Tribal Council. The Vice
Chairman shall assist the Chairman when called upon to do so, and in 
the absence of the Chairman, he shall preside. When so presiding 
he shall have all the rights, privileges, duties, and responsibilities 
of the Chairman.

Section 3.  The Secretary-Treasurer of the Tribal Council. The 
Secretary-Treasurer shall keep a full report of all proceedings of each 
regular and special meeting of the Tribal Council and the Band, and 
shall perform such other duties of like nature as the Tribal Council 
shall from time to time by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies 
of the minutes of each meeting to the Superintendent in charge of the 
Reservation and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall be the custodian of all moneys 

which may come under the jurisdiction or control of the Tribal Council. 
He shall pay out money in accordance with the orders and resolutions 
of the Tribal Council. He shall keep an account of all receipts and 
disbursements and shall report the same to the Tribal Council at each 
regular meeting.

He shall be bonded in such an amount as the Tribal Council may, 
by resolution, prescribe. The bond shall be subject to the approval of 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The books of the Secretary- 
Treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection at the direction of 
the Tribal Council or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Until the 
Secretary-Treasurer is bonded, the Tribal Council may make such

provisions for the custody and disbursing of funds as shall guarantee their 
safe and proper disbursement and use.

Section 4. 

Duties of Appointive Officers and Boards. The duties of 

all appointive officers or boards shall be clearly defined by resolution of 
the Tribal Council at the time of their creation or appointment. Such 
boards and officers shall report from time to time, as required, to the 
Tribal Council, and their activities and decisions shall be subject to review 
by the Tribal Council upon the complaint of any person aggrieved.

Section 5. It shall be the duty of the Tribal Council, and every mem

ber thereof, to promote the general welfare of the members of the Band,
and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this Constitution and 
Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE II - CERTIFICATE OF ELECTION

 
 It shall be the duty of the Board appointed by the council to certify 

to the results of the election within five days after the election is held. 
The Secretary-Treasurer shall notify the persons elected.
 
 

ARTICLE III - COMPENSATION OF COUNCIL MEMBERS

 
 The Tribal Council may prescribe such compensation of officers and 

members of the Tribal Council as it deems advisable from such funds as 
may be available, subject to the approval of the general meeting of the 
Band in the annual October meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - TIME AND PLACE OF MEETING

 
 Section 1.  Meetings. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall 

be held at Moccasin, Arizona, on the Kaibab Reservation once a month, 
at such time as the council by resolution may designate.

Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or by written 
notice signed by a majority of the Tribal Council members, and when so 
called, the Tribal Council shall have power to transact business as in 
regular meetings.

Section 2.  Quorum. No business shall be transacted unless a 
quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of four council members.

Section 3.  Quorum of the General Council. A quorum at a general 
council of the Tribe shall consist of one-third of eligible resident voters 
of the reservation.

Section 4.  General Council Meetings. There shall be an annual 

general council meeting open to all members of the Band, held on the 
Kaibab Indian Reservation the first Wednesday of October. At this annual 
meeting, election of council members and officers shall be held as 
designated heretofore in this Constitution. It shall also be the duty of the 
retiring Chairman to make a report at said meeting of the activities of 
the Tribal Council throughout the year, and to outline proposed plans for 
the economic and social betterment of the reservation.

Section 5.  Special Meetings. Special general council meetings may 

be called by the Chairman of the Tribal Council, provided that due notice 
is posted within the reservation at least five days prior to such meeting. 
Thirty percent of the legal voters of the Band may at any time, by written 
petition, call a general council meeting, provided, that at least five days' 
notice is posted within the reservation.

Section 6.  Order of Business. The order of business at any regular 

or special meeting of the Tribal Council shall be as follows:

1.  Call to order by the Chairman
2.  Roll call
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting
4.  Report of Committees
5.  Report of Secretary-Treasurer
6.  Reading of communications
7.  Unfinished business
8.  New business
9.  Adjournment
 
 

ARTICLE V - INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS AND COUNCIL MEMBERS

 
 Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of office 
prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall pledge himself 

to support and defend the Constitution of the United States and this 
Constitution and Bylaws.

Oath: "I, ___________________, do solemnly swear that I will

support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; that I will carry out faithfully and impartially the duties of 
my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote and 
protect the best interests of my people, in accordance with the Constitu
tion and Bylaws.”
 
 

ARTICLE VI - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of 

the voters of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians of the Kaibab Indian 
Reservation, voting at a special election called by the Secretary of the 
Interior, in which at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, 
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and 
shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

APPROVAL 

 
 .

I,  Dale E. Doty, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United 

States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act 'of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians, Arizona.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 

Department or by the Bureau of Indian Affairs so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and Bylaws 
are hereby declared inapplicable to the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and Bylaws.

Approval recommended: June 11, 1951

/s/ D. S. Myer
Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C. 
June 15, 1951

(Sgd) Dale E. Doty

Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, recommended by the Constitutional
Committee, of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians, the attached Constitu
tion and By-laws was submitted for ratification to the members of the 
Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians and was on May 15, 1951, duly approved 
by a vote of 26 for and 5 against, in an election in which more than 
30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance 
with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

/s/ Morris Jake 
Chairman, Election Board

/b/ Julia Bulletts 
Secretary, Election Board

/s/ Forrest R. Stone__________________ May 15, 1951
Superintendent, Uintah & Ouray Agency
 
  
  
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
KAIBAB BAND OF PAIUTE INDIANS 
 
 of the  
 

KAIBAB RESERVATION, ARIZONA

AMENDMENT I


Article II of the constitution, Membership, shall be amended in its 
entirety to read as follows:

Section 1. The membership of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians shall 
be governed by the following provisions:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll of the Kaibab Reservation as of January 1, 
1940, except those individuals who have relinquished member
ship in the Kaibab Band or have become enrolled as members of 
some other tribe or band.

(b)  All children of 1/4 or more degree Indian blood born after 
January 1, 1940, to members of the Kaibab Band.

(c)  Adoption into the tribe of any person of Indian blood who 
does not meet the requirements in this Article shall be accom
plished by the majority vote of the qualified voters of the 
band, voting at an election called for that purpose by the 
Tribal Council or upon presentation of a petition for the meeting 
signed by one-fourth of the qualified voters, members of the 
Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians. Such adoptions shall be subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(d)  Corrections may be made to the roll at any time by the 
Tribal Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary or his 
authorized representative.

(e)  Any person rejected for enrollment as a member of the Kaibab 
Band, except those persons rejected under subsection (c) of this 
section, shall have the right to appeal from that decision to the 
Secretary of the Interior and the decision of the Secretary shall 

be final. All appeals must be filed in accordance with the 
procedures set out in 25 CFR 42.

(f)  The enrollment records shall be kept current by the Tribal 
Council who shall remove therefrom the names of persons who die 
or relinquish membership in the band, and by adding thereto the 
names of persons who qualify for membership.

(g)  The Tribal Council shall have the authority to prescribe 
rules to be followed in compiling a membership roll, the completed 
roll to be approved by the Tribal Council. In the event the roll 
is used as the basis for distributing tribal assets, it shall be 
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Secretary of the 

Interior on March 8, 1965, the attached Amendment I to the Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians of the Kaibab Reser

vation, Arizona, was submitted to the qualified voters of the Kaibab 

Band and was on May 1, 1965, duly adopted by a vote of 36 for, and 

1 against, in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 59 members 

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of 

the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Clyde W. Pensoneau 
Chairman, Election Board

Georgie George 
Election Board Member

Dan Bullett 
Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Stewart L. Udall, Secretary of the Interior of the 

United. States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 

approve the attached Amendment I to the Constitution and Bylaws of 

the Kaibab Band of Paiute Indians of the Kaibab Reservation, Arizona.

Approval recommended:

(Sgd) James E. Officer

Associate Commissioner 
Bureau of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Bate: May 29, 1965

 (Sgd) Stewart L. Udall

Secretary of the Interior 
 
 

(SEAL)

 
 