 
  
  
  
  
 REVISED 
 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
KALISPEL INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 of 
 

KALISPEL RESERVATION


 
 JULY 27, 1967 
 

REVISED CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE KALISPEL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
OF
THE KALISPEL RESERVATION

PREAMBLE


We, the Kalispel Band of Indians of the Kalispel Reservation, in order 
to farm a more unified, workable tribal organization, do hereby amend 
and revise our tribal constitution and bylaws so that it reads as 
follows:
 
 

ARTICLE I

 
 Territory and Jurisdiction

The territory governed by the Kalispel Indian Community shall he comprised 
of all the geographic area within the confines of the Kalispel Reservation 
established by Executive Order dated March 23, 1914, and any other lands 
thereafter added thereto.

The jurisdiction of the Kalispel Indian Community extending to all of 
said territory and over its members shall be the jurisdiction common to 
Indian tribes and not in conflict with legally accepted jurisdiction 
of the United States Government or of the State of Washington in the 

same geographical area or over the same people.
 
 

ARTICLE II

 
 Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Kalispel Indian Community shall consist 
of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll of the Kalispel Indians as of April 1, 1934. 
Such roll may be corrected subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior

(b)  All children born to any member of the Kalispel Indian 
Community prior to the effective date of this revised constitution 
all children of one-fourth or more degree of Indian blood, 
born subsequent to the effective date of this constitution to any 
member of the Kalispel Indian Community who is one-fourth or more 
degree Kalispel Indian blood.

Sec, 2. The business committee shall have the power to enact ordinances 
subject to this revised constitution and bylaws and to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative, governing 
future membership, adoptions and loss of membership in the Kalispel 
Indian Community.
 
 

ARTICLE III

 
 Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Kalispel Indian Community shall 
be a business committee.

Sec, 2. The business committee, consisting of seven (7) members, 
shall consist of a chairman, vice chairman, secretary-treasurer, and 
four (4) other members and shall be subject to the following rules of 
eligibility.

(a)  Each must be an enrolled member of the Kalispel Indian 
Community and he at least 21 years of age, except that a non- 
Kalispel of at least one-fourth Indian blood who is married to 
a Kalispel and/or has children on the Kalispel roll and who at 
the time of his election is, and has for at least ten (10) years 

immediately prior thereto, physically resided on the Kalispel 
Reservation shall be eligible to serve on the committee but not 
as an officer.

(b)  The three officers and all the other members of the 
business committee must reside and have physically resided 
for the previous year within fifteen (15) miles of the 
reservation except that two members at large, not officers, 
may reside and have resided as far as one hundred twenty (120) 
miles from the reservation.
 
 

ARTICLE IV

 
 Nominations and Elections

Section 1. The candidates for membership on the business committee, 
except for the initial election pursuant to this article, shall be 
nominated and voted on by secret ballot at a meeting of the Kalispel 
Community Council on the second Wednesday of June of each year, or on 
any subsequent date to which the meeting is recessed or postponed. 
However, such postponement shall not exceed thirty (30) days.

(a)  The Kalispel Community Council shall consist of all 
the voting members of the Kalispel Indian Community.

(b)  The word “tribe” whenever used herein is synonymous 
with the "Kalispel Indian Community.”

Sec. 2. She first election of the business committee shall he called 
by the existing business committee within sixty (60) days following 
the approval of this constitution and bylaws by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

Sec. 3. All positions on the business committee shall be filled at the 
first election and at each subsequent annual election. The term of 
office shall be for one year and until those duly elected assume office, 
except as modified pursuant to Section 7(b) of this article. Each of 
the officers shall be elected separately with community council members 
voting first for chairman, then for vice chaiman, then for secretary- 
treasurer and, finally, in a group for the remaining members until such 
time as the community council say duly delegate the selection of officers 
to the business committee pursuant to Section 7(e) of this article.

Sec. 4. Should more than one candidate living more than fifteen (15) 
miles from the reservation be among four receiving the highest number 
of votes, only the two top vote-getters of such candidates will be 
entitled to be declared elected and any other such candidates will be 
ignored in listing the top four vote-getters.

Sec. 5. All elections shall be held in accordance with rules laid 
down by the business committee, except that only the community council 
may take binding action concerning the matters listed in Section 7 of 
this article.

Sec. 6. Any qualified member of the tribe who is enrolled or is entitled 
to enrollment and who is twenty-one (21) years of age or over shall be 
entitled to vote. He must be present to vote. No proxies or absentee 
ballots shall be allowed.

Sec.7. Notwithstanding the provisions of Section 2, Article. III and 
Section 3 of this article, the community council, meeting in a special 
meeting called for that purpose, may change the makeup of the business 
committee, terms of office, election procedures and the method of 
selecting officers as follows:

(a) It may reduce the number of business committee members 
to five (5).

(b)  It may provide for staggered three-year terms of the 
members of the business committee.

(c)  It may provide that the officers be elected by the 
members of the business committee rather than by the com
munity council.

(d)  If it adopts change c, it may also provide that all the 
candidates in any election be voted on at the same time on 
a single ballot with the polls open for voting for at least 
an eight (8) hour period.

(e)  It may delete the provisions allowing a non-Kalispel 
to serve on the committee, and if it reduces the size of the 
business committee to five (5) may delete or limit to one 
person the provision allowing members living more than 
fifteen (15) miles from the reservation to serve on the 

committee.

Sec. 8. Except for 7(d) which can be adopted only if 7(c) is also 
adopted, the community council may adopt any one or more of the changes 
listed in Section 7 and the changes it does adopt need not be adopted 
at the same time but may he adopted over a period of time without 
limitation, Provided, however, that once any listed change is adopted 
it may not be changed again without going through the process for amending 
this constitution.

Sec._9. No person is eligible to be a candidate for a position on the 
business committee who within one year prior to the election has been 
convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor involving dishonesty.
 
 

ARTICLE V

 
 Vacancies and Removal from Office

Section 1. Vacancies may occur on the business committee by reason of 
any of the following:

(a)  By death or resignation of the member.

(b)  By a member being convicted of a felony or of a misdemeanor 
involving dishonesty.

(c)  By a member having been expelled or suspended from the 
committee by a majority vote of the community council at a

meeting called for that purpose a by a vote of at least 

five (5) of the seven (7] members of the business committee — 
three (3) of the five (5) members, should Article IV, Section 7 (a] 
be adopted — by reason of neglect of duty, gross misconduct, 
repeated, unexcused absences or because of the member becoming 
mentally or physically incapable of performing his duties.

Before any member is suspended or expelled for any reason listed in 
subsections (t) or (c) above, he shall be furnished a written statement 
of the reasons at least five (5) days before the meeting of the com
munity council or business committee (at which he shall have an 
opportunity to appear and be heard) when the proposed action of sus
pension or expulsion is to be considered.

Sec. 2. Any vacancy shall be filled by the business committee and the 
appointee shall hold office until the next annual election.
 
 

ARTICLE VI

 
 Powers and Duties of the Business Committee

Section 1. The business committee shall have the following powers 
subject to any limitations legally imposed by the statutes or 
constitution of the United States and of the State of Washington.

(a)  As the governing body of the Kalispel Indian Community, which 
is a recognized Indian tribe the business committee is hereby 
suppressed to exercise all the powers and authority, express, implied 
or inherent, vested by existing law in the community as an Indian 
tribe.

In addition to the above powers the business committee 
(b) 
shall have the following specific powers which are required 
to be stated by the Indian Reorganization Act (25 U.S.C. 476);

1.  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and 
the fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior as long as such approval is 
required by Federal law;

2.  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets 
without the consent of the general membership of the tribe.

3. To negotiate with the Federal, State and local 
governments on behalf of the tribe.

4. To advise the Secretary of the Interior with 
regard to all appropriation estimates or Federal 
projects for the benefit of the Kalispel Tribe prior 
to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of 
the Budget and to Congress.

(c)  To have and exercise such other powers and authority as 
reasonably necessary to fulfill its obligations, responsibilities, 
objects and purposes as the governing body of the tribe.

Sec. 2. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in 
the Kalispel Indian Community but not expressly referred to in this 
revised constitution shall not be abridged by this article, but may be 
exercised by the members of the community through the adoption of 

appropriate amendments to this revised constitution and bylaws.

Sec. 3. Community Council Review. The community council may, within 
a period of thirty-five (35) days, reconsider or review any action 
already taken by the business committee. Any modification or reversal 
of the previous action taken by the business committee shall be the 
action of the tribe and binding on the business committee.

(a)  Upon the giving of notice as prescribed in Article II, 
Section 2, of the bylaws, which notice shall give the reason 
for the meeting, a community council meeting will be held to 
consider or reconsider any action taken or likely to be taken 
by the business committee.

(b)  Any action taken by the business committee shall be at 
all times presumably final and will become legally final 
when action is not taken in the community council in con
formity with subsection (a) above to reconsider the business 
committee action.
 
 

ARTICLE VII

 
 Amendments

This revised constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote
of the qualified voters of the Kalispel Indian Community voting at an

election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, pro
vided that at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote cast 
ballots. No amendment shall be effective until it shall have been 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an elec
tion on any proposed amendment when requested to do so by a majority 
vote of either the community council or the business committee or upon 
the receipt of a petition for an election signed by twenty-five (25) of 
the eligible voters of the tribe. No amendment shall become effective 
until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE KALISPEL INDIAN COMMUNITY

ARTICLE I

 
 Officers and their Duties

Section 1. If the community council delegates to the business committee 
the choosing of its officers, such action shall be taken by the business 
committee every year at its first meeting following the annual election.

Sec. 2. Chairman. The chairman shall preside over all meetings of 
the community council and the business committee. He shall perform all 
the customary and traditional duties as chairman and shall have the same 
vote as other members of the tribe and of the business committee.

Sec. 3. Vice Chairman. The vice chairman shall perform all duties of 
the chairman in the absence of the chairman.

Sec. 4. Secretary-Treasurer. As secretary he shall be responsible 
for tribal correspondence and reports and shall keep a complete record 
of minutes of all business conducted at the business committee and 
community council meetings. The business committee may designate an 
assistant secretary to assist the secretary or to perform the secretary's 
duties in the secretary’s absence.

As treasurer he shall exercise those duties customarily performed by a 
treasurer and shall, if he is Intended to have actual moneys in his 
possession or control, provide at tribal expense such bond as the 
business committee may require.
 
 

ARTICLE II

 
 Meetings and Procedure

Section 1. Regular meetings. Regular meetings of the business com
mittee shall be quarterly in the months of January, April, July and 
October on a day to be designated by the chairman. Following the 
initial election under this revised constitution and bylaws, the 
regular annual election meeting of the community council shall be held 
on the second Wednesday of June, unless rescheduled pursuant to Article IV, 
Section 1, of this revised constitution.

Sec. 2. Special meetings. Special meetings of the community council 
or of the business committee may be called by mailing a written notice 
thereof to the members at least five (5) days in advance of the meeting. 
Said notice shall list the principal reason or reasons for the meeting 
and may be signed by the chairman, by three (3) members of the business 
committee or by ten (10) tribal members. Said written, mailed notice 
shall not be required when the next meeting date is announced during a 
community council or business committee meeting.

Sec. 3. Quorums. A quorum for the community council shall be twenty-two 
(22) members and of the business committee shall be five (5) members; 
Provided, however, that if Article IV, Section 7(a) of this revised 
constitution is adopted, a quorum of the business committee shall be 
three (3) members.

Sec. 4. Compensation. The business committee may provide such com
pensation as it deems advisable for its officers and members and for 
the officers and members of other committees.
 
 

ARTICLE III

 
 Ratification

This revised constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote 
of the voters of the Kalispel Indian Community, voting at a special 
election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 
thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be 
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval and shall 
be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 

on June 21, 1967, the attached Revised Constitution and By
Laws, or Amendment, of the Kalispel Indian Community of the 
Kalispel Reservation was submitted to the qualified voters of 
the Tribe and was on July 12, 1967, duly adopted 
by a vote of 23 for and 1* against, in an elec
tion in which at least 30 percent of the 65 members entitled 
to vote cast their ballot in accordance with Section 16 of the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended hy the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

* one ballot unmarked
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I, Harry R. Anderson, Assistant Sectary of

the Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the 

authority granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended, do hereby approve the attached Revised Constitution 

and Bylaws of the Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel 

Reservation.

Washington, D. C.

Date: JUL 27 1967

JUL B B 1953
 
  
  
  
 

AMENDMENT
REVISED CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
KALISPEL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the 
 
KALISPEL RESERVATION

AMENDMENT X


Section 6 of Article IV of the constitution, Nominations and Elections, 

shall be amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Section 6. Any qualified member of the tribe who is 
enrolled or entitled to be enrolled and who is 18 years 
of age or over shall be entitled to vote. He must be 
present to vote. No proxies or absentee ballots shall 
be allowed.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Assistant Commissioner 

of Indian Affairs on February 17, 1969, under delegated authority,

the attached Amendment to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation, was submitted 

to the qualified voters of the community and was on June 18,

1969, duly adopted by a vote of 18 for, and 4 against, 

in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 67 

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of 

the Indian Reorganisation Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378),
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I, Harrison Loesch, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United 

States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by the 

Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 

the attached Amendment I to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of 

the Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation.

Approval Recommended:

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date" July 28, 1969
 
  
  
 

HARRISON LOESCH

 
 Assistant Secretary of the Interior  
 

(SEAL)

AMENDMENT 
 
 REVISED CONSTITUTION & BYLAWS 
of the 
 
  
  
 
KALISPEL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the  
 
KALISPEL RESERVATION

AMENDMENT II

 
 Article VIII to be added to the Revised Constitution as follows:
 
 

ARTICLE VIII

 
 Bill of Rights

All members of the Kalispel Indian Community shall be 
accorded equal protection of the law under this 
Constitution and Bylaws or under any tribal coda or 
ordinance governing the Community or the Kalispel 
Reservation. No member shall be denied any of the 
rights or guarantees enjoyed by citizens under the 
Constitution of the United States, including, but not 
limited to, freedom of religion and conscience, 
freedom of speech, the right to orderly association or 
assembly, the right to petition for action or the 
redress of grievances and due process of law.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Assistant Commissioner

of Indian Affairs on February 17, 1969, under delegated authority,

the attached Amendment to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the

Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation, was submitted 

to the qualified voters of the community and was on June 18,

1969, duly adopted by a vote of 19 for, and 3 against,

in an election in which at least 30 percent of the 

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of

the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I, Harrison Loesch, Assistant Secretary of rhe Interior of the United 

States of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by the 

Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Scat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 

attached Amendment II to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation.

Approval Recommended:

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Date: July 28, 1969
 
  
 

HARRISON LOESCH 

 
 Assistant Secretary of the Interior  
 

(SEAL)

AMENDMENT
REVISED CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 


 
  
  
  
  
 of the 
 
KALISPEL INDIAN COMMUNITY
 
 of the 
 
KALISPEL RESERVATION

 
 MAR 10 1976 
 

AMENDMENT III


Article II of the constitution, Membership, shall be amended in 

its entirety to read as follows:

Section 1. The membership of the Kalispel Indian Community 
shall consist of:

a.  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll of the Kalispel Indians as of April 1, 
1934. Such roll may be corrected and the corrections shall 
be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

b.  All Indian blood degrees shown on the Basic Membership 

Roll of the Kalispel Tribe, dated April 1, 1934, are to be 
considered Kalispel blood for purposes of this Article. This 
subsection shall be made retroactive to April 1, 1934, for 
determining eligibility for enrollment but shall not be 
retroactive for purposes of determining entitlement to 
payments made to Tribal members by virtue of enrollment.

c.  All children born to any member of the Kalispel Indian 

Community prior to July 27, 1967 and all children of one
fourth or more degree of Indian blood, born on or after 
July 27, 1967 to any member of the Kalispel Indian Community 
who is one-fourth or more degree Kalispel Indian blood,
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area Director, Portland

Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, on March 5, 1976, 

under delegated authority, the attached Amendment to the Revised

Constitution and Bylaws of the Kalispel Indian Community of the

Kalispel Reservation, was submitted to the qualified voters of the

community and was on May 22, 1976, duly adopted by a

vote of 17 for, and 5 against, in an election in which

at least 30 percent of the 37 entitled to vote cast 

their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 

the Act of June 15, 1935 ( 49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Francis E. Briscoe, Portland Area Director, Bureau of 

Indian Affairs, Portland, Oregon, by virtue of the authority granted 

to the Secretary of the Interior of the United States, by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to the 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 230 DM 1,1 and redelegated to me 

by 10 BIAM, do hereby approve the foregoing Amendment III to the 

Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Kalispel Indian Community.

Portland Area Director 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Portland, Oregon

Date June 3, 1976

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 Northwest Regional Office
911 N.E. 11th Avenue
Portland, Oregon 97232-4169

APR 0 1 2011

Honorable Glen Nenema
Chairman
Kalispel Tribe of Indians
Post Office Box 39
Usk, Washington 99180

Dear Chairman Nenema:

This is in response to your letter of March 21, 2011, requesting this office to clarify Amendment 

III to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation. 

Kalispel Resolution No. 14 was enacted on July 30, 1975, by the Kalispel Business Committee to 

use the blood degrees as shown on the Basic Membership Roll of April 1, 1934, as all Kalispel 

Indian blood. It was the intent of the resolution to amend only Section 1 of Article II - 

Membership. Therefore the Amendment III should not have used the word "entirety" in 

amending Article II as it was only intended to amend Section 1. Section 2 of Article II shall 

remain the same and in effect as written. We hope this clarification will be of some assistance 

to the Tribe and its membership. If you have any questions, please contact Betty Scissons, 

Tribal Government Specialist, at (503) 231-6723.

Sincerely,

APR 06 2011

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 Northwest Regional Office 
911 Northeast 11th Avenue 
Portland, Oregon 97232

In Reply Refer To:
Division of Tribal Government

NOV 20 2019

The Honorable Glen Nenema 
Kalispel Indian Community 
of the Kalispel Reservation
Post Office Box 39
Usk, Washington 99180-0039

Dear Chairman Nenema:

On August 29, 2019 we received Kalispel Resolution 2019-51 officially requesting a Secretarial 
election to decide one proposed amendment to the Revised Constitution and Bylaws of the Kalispel 
Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation; to remove the Secretarial approval requirement from 
Article VII - Amendments.

The election was held on November 8, 2019. 25 CFR Parts 81.44 (a) through (f) require the Election 
Board Chair to transmit the following documents to the Authorizing Official: (a) the original text of 
the material voted on, (b) the Eligible Voters List, (c) the Registered Voters List, (d) the Secretarial 
Election Notice Packet, (e) any challenges to the Secretarial election results, and (f) the Certificate of 
Results of Election. After the mandatory five-day challenge period expired (25 CFR Part 81.43), the 
documents were transmitted as required. The Election Board advises there were no challenges.

A total of 58 eligible Kalispel tribal members registered to vote in this election. For the election to be 
valid at least 30 percent (17 people) of those registered must cast their ballots. The proposed ballot 
measure had 31 valid votes either for or against, making the election valid. 25 CFR 81.44(b)(1). The 
ballot measure was approved by the voters as noted in the Enclosed Certificate. 25 CFR 81.44(b)(2). 
The proposed amendments were reviewed prior to the election and were determined to not be 
contrary to Federal law. 25 CFR 81.44 (b)(3).

The Secretarial Election Board is to be commended for its efforts in this election. This constitutes a 
final agency action for the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

If you have further questions, please contact Greg Norton, Tribal Government Specialist, at 
(503)231-6723.

Sincerely,
 
  
  
  
 

AMENDMENT
REVISED CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
KALISPEL INDIAN COMMUNITY 
 
 of the  
 
KALISPEL RESERVATION


AMENDMENT IV:

Article VII of the Constitution, Amendments, shall be amended in its entirety to read as follows:

Article VII

Amendments

This revised constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the 
Kalispel Indian Community voting at an election called for that purpose by the Business Committee, 
provided that at least thirty (30) percent of eligible voters cast ballots.

It shall be the duty of the Business Committee to call an election on any proposed amendment upon 
being instructed to do so by a majority vote of either the Community Council or the Business Committee 
or upon the receipt of a petition for such signed by twenty-five (25) of the eligible voters of the Tribe.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial Election authorized by the Northwest Regional Director on

August 29, 2019, the amendment to the Constitution of the Kalispel Indian Community of the

Kalispel Reservation was submitted to the qualified voters of the Kalispel Indian Community

on November 8, 2019. Proposed Amendment A was dull approved by a vote of 

29 for and 4 against, and 0 cast ballots found to be spoiled or mutilated in an

election in which 2/3 of the voting membership must be in favor of the amendment and at least 

thirty percent (30%) of the 58 members entitled to vote (registered to vote), cast their ballots. 

This Secretarial Election was conducted in accordance with Article III, Section 1 of the Tribal

Constitution and Bylaws.

Dated 11.8.2019
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 Bodie Shaw  ACTING

I, Bryan K. Mercier, Northwest Regional Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, Portland, Oregon, by 

virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior of the United States, by the Act of

June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to me pursuant to 209 DM 8, 230 DM 

1, 3 1AM 4, 4A do hereby approve the foregoing Amendment IV to the Constitution and By-Laws 

of the Kalispel Indian Community of the Kalispel Reservation. This amendment was adopted by 

a majority of the qualified voters at a Secretarial Election held on November 8, 2019 in which at 

least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots.

Bryan K. Mercier
Northwest Regional Director

Date 11/20/19

