 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 
OF THE
KASHIA BAND OF POMO INDIANS
OF THE
STEWARTS POINT RANCHERIA, CALIFORNIA

 
 Approved January 30, 2011 by Secretarial Election

Certificate of Approval by the Secretary of the Interior 
on February 15, 2011

We, the adult members of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians of the Stewarts Point 
Rancheria, do hereby establish and approve this Constitution in order to:

•  Strengthen our Tribal bonds;
•  Govern ourselves by our own laws and customs for the common good and well

being of the Tribe and its members;

•  Protect the validity of our governmental processes;
•  Perpetuate our culture and Tribal identity;
•  Protect and promote our Tribal resources;
•  Maintain peace and order in our communities; and
•  Protect and develop the individual and collective rights and benefits of our 

members.

We affirm that our traditional cultural heritage and inherent sovereignty are the 
basis of the well being and continuity of the Kashia people.

ARTICLE 1 - TERRITORY & JURISDICTION

Section 1.  Territory

The Territory of the Tribe includes all lands within the exterior boundaries of the 
Stewarts Point Rancheria; any and all other lands held by the Tribe; and any 
additional lands acquired by the Tribe or by the United States for the benefit of the 
Tribe. Such lands include, without limitation, surface and underground rights, 
including minerals, natural and cultural resources, water rights and air space.

Section 2.  Jurisdiction

The Tribe has and may exercise jurisdiction over all its members, wherever located; 
and all persons, property, lands, resources and activities occurring within the Tribe's 
Territory, to the fullest extent permitted by law.

ARTICLE 2  - MEMBERSHIP

Section 1. The membership of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the "approved list of 
voters for the Stewarts Point Rancheria," 1935-1936 and "list of children on 
the Stewarts Point Rancheria (under 21)," 1935-1936 both lists approved by 
the General Council on November 15, 1936.

(b)  Any person who is a lineal descendant of any person listed under section 

(a) above.

(c) Any person with Indian blood not otherwise qualified for membership who 

is adopted into the Tribe consistent with requirements approved by the 
General Council.

Section 2. In accordance with Article 5 and Article 6, Section 1 of this Constitution, 

the General Council shall, within 180 days after the Constitution becomes 
effective, adopt one or more ordinances consistent with the provisions of this 
Constitution covering membership and enrollment procedures.

ARTICLE 3 - GOVERNING BODY: GENERAL COUNCIL

Section 1. Composition, We hereby affirm the governing body of the Kashia Band of 

Pomo Indians is the General Council, which is composed of all qualified 
voters of the Tribe.

Section 2. Duties. It shall be the duty of all members of the General Council to 
cooperate to protect and advance the best interests of the Tribe and the 
general welfare of all Tribal members, support and defend this Constitution 
and all Tribal laws, and carry out these duties faithfully and impartially.

Section 3. Qualified Voters. All enrolled members of the Kashia Band of Pomo 

Indians who are 18 years of age or over are qualified voters of the Tribe. The 
General Council may impose reasonable qualifications other than 
membership and age for eligibility to vote.

Section 4. Quorum. Forty qualified voters shall make up a quorum, which is the 

minimum number of voters that must be present at a meeting for a vote of 
the General Council to be valid, or that must participate in a General Council 
action (such as the calling of a special meeting, or to initiate proceedings to 
recall an officer).

Section 5. Regular Meetings, Regular meetings of the General Council shall take 

place quarterly, on the second Saturday of February, May, August and 
November each year. The Tribal Council may, upon at least thirty (30) days 
written notice to the General Council, change the date of a regularly 
scheduled General Council meeting that falls on a Tribally-recognized 
holiday, or in the event of a natural disaster affecting Sonoma County, or 
death of a Tribal member upon written request from the member's family.

Section 6. Special Meetings. The chairperson, or a quorum of the qualified voters by 
written petition to the Tribal Council for action, may call special meetings of 
the General Council. A notice of the date, time and location of each special 
meeting, along with a summary of the purpose for calling the special 
meeting, shall be sent to all members of the General Council at least thirty 
(30) days before the meeting takes place.

Section 7. Meeting Notices. The following procedures shall apply to notices for all 

regular and special meetings of the General Council:

(a)  Each meeting notice shall be mailed at least thirty (30) days, but no more 
than forty-five (45) days, prior to the date the meeting takes place.

(b)  The agenda for each meeting shall be mailed with the meeting notice or 
separately at least two (2) weeks prior to the date the meeting takes place.

(c)  The meeting shall be announced on a separate sheet of paper, easily 
identifiable to the members as a meeting notice.

(d)  The General Council may approve additional rules governing how notice of 
General Council meetings is given, including circumstances under which it may 
be appropriate to give less than thirty (30) days written notice of a meeting.

Section 8. Meeting Procedures.

(a)  At each General Council meeting, the following items shall be addressed, as 
appropriate:

1. 
2. 
3. 
4. 
5. 
6. 
7. 
8. 

Opening Prayer
Approval of Agenda
Approval of Prior Meeting Minutes
Treasurer's Report
Committee Reports
Administrator's Report, as reguested by the General Council
Unfinished Business
New business

(b)  Voting on matters before the General Council may take place while there is 
a quorum present at a duly called regular or special meeting. In the absence 
of a quorum, each meeting shall commence or continue as an informational 
meeting.

(c)  Voting may take place by a show of hands or by secret written ballot, as 
defined by tribal law or otherwise determined appropriate by the General 
Council given the subject matter of the vote.

ARTICLE 4 - ELECTED OFFICIALS: TRIBAL COUNCIL

Section 1. Composition The General Council shall elect from its own members, by 

secret ballot, a Tribal Council composed of the following officials:

(a)  Chairperson
(b)  Vice Chairperson
(c)  Secretary
(d)  Treasurer
(e)  Three Members-at Large.

The General Council may designate the positions of any or all Members-at-Large to 
represent a particular geographic or demographic group of the Tribal membership as 
it deems necessary to ensure full representation.

Section 2. Officer Duties.

(a)  It shall be the duty of the Chairperson to preside over all meetings of the 
General Council and implement and enforce all laws of the Tribe and directives 
of the General Council. All members of the Council and all subordinate officers 
shall assist the Chairperson in all proper ways to carry out the directives of the 
General Council.

(b)  It shall be the duty of the Vice Chairperson to perform the functions of the 
Chairperson in the Chairperson's absence and to implement and enforce all 
laws of the Tribe and directives of the General Council.

(c)  The Secretary shall keep a full report of all proceedings of each regular and 
special meeting of the General Council and of the Tribal Council, and shall 
perform such other duties of like nature as the General Council shall designate. 
The Secretary shall make minutes of all General Council and Tribal Council 
meetings available at the Tribal Office for inspection by Tribal members during 
normal business hours.

(d)  The Treasurer shall oversee the expenditure, accounting and audit of all 
Tribal assets and grant funds, and shall provide regular reports to the General 
Council. The Treasurer shall also preside over meetings and perform such 
other functions as necessary in the event both the Chair and the Vice Chair are 
absent. The Treasurer shall be bonded in such an amount as the General 
Council may by resolution provide.

(e)  The Members-at-Large shall perform the functions necessary to ensure the 
effective operation of the Tribal Council and shall implement and enforce all 
laws of the Tribe and directives of the General Council.

(f)  It shall be the duty of all members of the Tribal Council to cooperate to 
protect and advance the best interests of the Tribe and the general welfare of 
all Tribal members, support and defend this Constitution and all Tribal laws, 
and carry out these duties faithfully and impartially.

Section 3. Officer Elections; Terms of Office. In accordance with Article 5 and 
Article 6, Section 1 of this Constitution, the General Council shall, within 180 days 
after the effective date of the Constitution, approve an ordinance consistent with the 
provisions of this Constitution covering procedures for the election of officers. The 
election ordinance shall, at a minimum, define voter eligibility and officer 
qualifications, establish procedures for the recall of officers and for filling vacancies 
on the Tribal Council, and allow for voting by absentee ballot. The standard term for 
each office shall be two years,

Section 4. Initial Officer Election. Within one (1) year after the ratification and 
approval of this Constitution, an election shall be conducted in accordance with the 
procedures approved by the General Council to fill all positions on the Tribal Council. 
The persons in office at the time the Constitution is ratified and approved shall 
remain in office until the election is conducted and the newly elected officials are 
sworn in. The newly elected Chair, Secretary and two (2) Members-at-Large shall 
then hold office for a period of two (2) years, and the newly elected Vice Chair, 
Treasurer and remaining Member-at-Large shall hold office for a period of one (1) 
year; thereafter, elections shall be conducted annually, in accordance with the 
Tribe's election ordinance, with the terms of office staggered.

Section 5. Operating Procedures. The Tribal Council shall operate in accordance 
with procedures developed by the Tribal Council and approved by the General 
Council within 180 days after the Constitution becomes effective. The operating 
procedures shall, at a minimum, provide for a regular schedule of meetings and 
procedures for adequate notice to all General Council members of (1) the regular 
meeting schedules of the Tribal Council and General Council for the year, including 
meetings at the Stewarts Point Rancheria; (2) agendas for, and actions to be taken 
at, each upcoming meeting; and (3) a report, at least quarterly, of all meetings that 
have taken place, highlighting topics that have been addressed and actions that 
have been taken.

Section 6. Vacancies. Any officer who may resign, die or be removed or recalled 
from office shall be replaced at the next scheduled regular election or, if the vacancy 
is created more than six (6) months before the next regular election, in accordance 
with procedures specified in the Tribe's election ordinance.

Section 7. Removal/Suspension. The Tribal Council may remove or suspend an 
officer for:

(a)  failing to attend three (3) consecutive duly called Tribal Council or General 
Council meetings, whether regular or special, without good cause as defined 
by the General Council;

(b)  being convicted of a felony by any federal, state or tribal court while in 
office; or

(c) any other grounds defined by the General Council.

Section 8. Recall. A quorum of the General Council may initiate recall proceedings 
against a member of the Tribal Council for good cause, including the following:

Committing an act that is grounds for removal or suspension from office, 

(a) 
where the Tribal Council has failed to take action;

Being found by the General council to have committed a crime against the 

(b) 
Tribe or other violation(s) of the Tribe's Ethics and Conduct Ordinance;

Conduct that, in the view of the General Council, constitutes gross neglect 

(c) 
of duties.

Section 9. Procedures for Removal/Suspension/Recall, Removal, suspension and 
recall proceedings shall be conducted in accordance with procedures approved by 
the General Council that afford full due process rights to any Tribal Council member 
who is the subject of such proceedings, including a written statement of the charges, 
the right to respond to those charges, and the right to present witnesses and other 
evidence in his or her defense.

ARTICLE 5 - GOVERNMENTAL POWERS

Section 1. General Council Authority. The General Council of the Kashia Band of 
Pomo Indians shall have authority to exercise or delegate to the Tribal Council all 
powers vested in the Tribe through its inherent sovereignty and federal law 
including, without limitation, the following:

(a) To negotiate with federal, state, local and other tribal governments;

(b) To employ legal counsel and such other professional advisors as it deems 

necessary;

(c) To prevent any sale, lease or encumbrance of Tribal lands, interests in lands, 

or other Tribal assets;

(d) To manage, lease, contract, assign, or otherwise deal with tribal lands, 
homes, community buildings, infrastructure, funds and other assets and 
resources of the Tribe, subject to such federal approvals as may be required by 
law;

(e) To acquire, purchase or accept any land or property for and on behalf of the 
Tribe, and to request the Secretary of the Interior to take such lands into trust 
for the benefit of the Tribe;

(f) To protect and preserve the natural and cultural resources of the Tribe;

(g) To appropriate and regulate the use of Tribal funds;

(h) To advise the Secretary of the Interior and other federal funding agencies 

regarding Tribal needs for federal assistance;

(i) To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Kashia Band of Pomo 

Indians;

(j) To govern the conduct of Tribal members;

(k) To regulate or prohibit the activities of non-members within the Tribe's 

Territory, and to provide for the removal or exclusion of any non-member from 
the Rancheria;

(l) To create committees, districts, enterprises and other organizations 

accountable to the General Council for economic, community service or other 
purposes;

(m) To establish a court system, grievance board and/or committee for the 

resolution of disputes and the interpretation and enforcement of Tribal law;

(n) To provide for the participation of the Tribe in intertribal organizations for 

purposes that benefit the Tribe and Tribal members;

(o) To regulate the procedures of the General Council and other tribal agencies 
and organizations, consistent with this Constitution;

(p) To take all actions necessary to carry out the foregoing powers, as well as 
all other inherent sovereign powers of the Tribe that are not specifically listed 
above.

Section 2. Delegation to Tribal Council. For purposes of ensuring the effective 
functioning of the Tribal government, the General Council may, by ordinance, 
resolution or motion documented in the official minutes of a meeting, delegate to 
the Tribal Council any of the Tribe's governmental powers.

ARTICLE 6 - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS

Section 1. Ordinances. Tribal laws shall be documented in ordinances approved by 
the General Council. All ordinances shall be maintained at the Tribal Office and 
made available during normal business hours for inspection by Tribal members and 
other persons who may be subject to the provisions of such ordinances.

Section 2. Resolutions. Final decisions on matters of temporary or limited purpose, 
such as authorization to enter a contract or approval of a budget item, shall be 
documented in resolutions of the General Council or Tribal Council, noted in meeting 
minutes or in a separate document. All resolutions shall be maintained in the Tribal 
Office and made available during normal business hours for inspection by tribal 
members.

Section 3. Review of Ordinances and Resolutions. Ordinances and resolutions shall 
be submitted to the Interior Department or its authorized representative for review, 
comment and/or approval only if required by federal law or otherwise requested by 
the General Council or Tribal Council.

ARTICLE 7  - BILL OF RIGHTS

Subject to reasonable limitations that may be imposed by the General Council 
consistent with this Constitution, all members of the Tribe shall enjoy equal political 
rights and opportunities to participate in the Tribal government, Tribal economic 
resources, Tribal assets, and all the rights and benefits that are conferred upon a 
Tribal member. The Tribe, in exercising its powers of self-government, shall 
guarantee to all persons the protections set forth in the Indian Civil Rights Act (see 
attached).

ARTICLE 8  - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

Section 1. Nothing in this Constitution is intended to be a waiver of any aspect of 
the sovereign immunity of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians of the Stewarts Point 
Rancheria. The Tribe hereby declares that, in exercising its sovereignty to the fullest 
extent provided by law, the Tribe is immune from legal action against it. This is the 
case except to the extent that the Tribe expressly waives its sovereign immunity or 
such waiver is imposed by federal law.

Section 2. To be effective, a waiver of Tribal sovereign immunity for any purpose 
must be clearly expressed in writing in an ordinance, resolution, lease or other 
contract approved by the General Council.

ARTICLE 9  - RATIFICATION OF THIS CONSTITUTION
This Constitution, when approved by a majority vote of the voters of the Kashia Band 
of Pomo Indians voting at a special election called by the Secretary of the Interior, 
or his authorized representative, in which at least 30 percent of those entitled to 
vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for approval, and 
shall become effective on the date of such approval.

ARTICLE 10  - FUTURE AMENDMENTS / REVISIONS

Once ratified, this Constitution may be amended or revised by a majority vote of the 
qualified voters of the Tribe voting at an election following procedures approved by 
the General Council, in accordance with 25 U.S.C.  476(h), provided that at least 20 
percent of those entitled to vote shall vote on the proposed amendment or revision.

