 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE 
KASHIA BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF 
THE STEWARTS POINT RANCHERIA

CALIFORNIA


 
  
  
 APPROVED MARCH 11, 1935 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE KASHIA BAND OF 
POMO INDIANS OF THE STEWARTS POINT RANCHERIA, 
CALIFORNIA


We, the Indians of the Stewarts Point Rancheria, in order to estab
lish a legal rancheria organization and secure certain privileges and 
powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization Act, do ordain and 
establish this constitution and by-laws for the Kashia Band of Pomo 
Indians of the Stewarts Point Rancheria.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians shall extend 
to the territory within the confines of the Stewarts Point Rancheria, 
and to such other lands as may hereafter be added thereto under any 
law of the United States, except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II.  —Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians 

shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

census rolls of the band as of April 1, 1935.

(b)  All children born to any member of the band who is a resident 

of the Rancheria at the time of the birth of said children.

Sec. 2. The community council shall have the power to promulgate 
ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, covering 
future membership and the adoption of new members, when the 
resources of the band make such adoptions feasible.

Article III.  —Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Kashia Band of Pomo In
dians shall be the community council which shall be composed of all 
qualified voters of the band. A majority of the eligible voters shall 
constitute a quorum.

Sec. 2. All enrolled members of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians 
who are 21 years of age or over and who have maintained legal resi
dence on the Rancheria for a period of 1 year immediately prior to any 
election, are qualified voters at such election. Such residence, how
ever, shall not be required as a qualification for voting upon amend
ments to the constitution and attached by-laws.

Sec. 3. The community council shall elect from its own members, 
by secret ballot, (a) chairman; (b) vice chairman; (c) secretary; 
(d) treasurer; (e) and such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. The community council shall meet on the first Monday of 

January and July.

Sec. 5. Within thirty (30) days after the ratification and approval 
of this constitution and by-laws, a community council shall be held 
for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it may 
transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers 
elected at this meeting shall serve until the July meeting at which 
time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be 
chosen at the July meeting.

Sec. 6. The chairman, or 25 percent of the qualified voters, may by 

written notice, call special meetings of the community council.

Sec. 7. The business committee shall consist of the chairman, 
secretary, and treasurer of the community council, and shall perform 
such duties as may be authorized by that Council.

Article IV—Powers of the Community Council

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The community council of the 
Kashia Band of Pomo Indians shall exercise the following powers, 
subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution 
of the United States:

To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments;
(a) 
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees 

to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets of the band;

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates for Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Stewarts Point Rancheria prior to the submission of such estimates 
to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Kashia 
Band of Pomo Indians in accordance with the terms of a charter that 
may be issued to the band by the Secretary of the Interior;

(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians, providing for the 
manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of tribal land 
or interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes and the appro
priation of available tribal funds for public purposes, providing for 
the licensing of nonmembers coming upon the Rancheria for purposes 
of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, and for the exclusion 
from the territory of the band, of persons not so licensed, and establish
ing proper agencies for the enforcement of such ordinances upon the 
Stewarts Point Rancheria;

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards or 
officials of the band, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right 
to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power;

(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this constitution 
and the attached By-laws, regulating the procedure of the council 
itself and of other tribal agencies, tribal officials, or tribal organiza
tions of the. Stewarts Point Rancheria.

Sec. 2. Future powers.—The community council may exercise such 
further powers as may in the future be delegated to the council by 
members of the band or by the Secretary of the Interior or any other, 
duly authorized official or agency of the State or Federal Government.

Sec. 3. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Kashia Band of Porno Indians, but not expressly referred to in 
this constitution shall not be abridged by this article, but may be 
exercised by the people of the Kashia Band of Pomo Indians through 
the adoption of appropriate by-laws and constitutional amendments.
Sec. 4. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this constitution is subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior, shall be presented to the superintendent in charge of the 
Rancheria, who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it 
shall thereupon become effective, but the superintendent shall trans
mit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of 
the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of enactment, 
rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying 
the community council of such decision.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him, within ten (10) days after its enactment, 
he shall advise the community council of his reasons therefor. If 
these reasons appear to the council insufficient it may by a majority 
vote refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, approve the 
same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall 
become effective.

Article V—Amendments

Section 1. This constitution and by-laws may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the band voting at an election 
called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that 
at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; 
but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. At any regular or special community council meeting amend
ments to this constitution and by-laws may be proposed to be acted 
upon at the next semiannual community council meeting. If approved 
by a majority vote at such meeting, the proposed amendment shall be 
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior who shall thereupon call an 
election upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

BY-LAWS FOR THE KASHIA BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE 
STEWARTS POINT RANCHERIA OF CALIFORNIA

 
 Article I

Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of 
office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall 
pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States and this constitution and by-laws.

Oath: “I,__________________ , do solemnly swear that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; that I will cany out, faithfully and impartially, the duties 
of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote, 
and protect the best interests of my band in accordance with this 
constitution and by-laws.”

Article II

It shall be the duty of the community council and each member 
thereof to promote the general welfare of the members of this band 
and to cany out the provisions and purposes of this constitution and 
by-laws.

Article III

It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside over all meetings of 
the community council and carry out all orders of the council. All 
members of the council and all subordinate officers shall assist the 
chairman in all proper ways to cany out the orders of the council.

Article IV

The community council secretary shall keep a full report of all 
proceedings of each regular and special meeting of the community 
council and of the business committee, and shall perform such other 
duties of like nature as the community council shall from time to time 
by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of the minutes of each 
meeting to the superintendent in charge of the Rancheria, and to the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Article V

The community council treasurer shall be the custodian of all 
moneys which may come under the jurisdiction or into the control 
of the community council. He shall pay out money in accordance 
with the orders and resolutions of the community council. He shall 
keep account of all receipts and disbursements and shall report the 
same to the community council at each regular meeting. He shall be 
bonded in such an amount as the community council may by resolu
tion, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, provide. The 
books of the council treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection 
at the direction of the community council, or the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs. Until the treasurer is bonded, the business committee 
may make such provision for the custody and disbursement of funds- 
as shall guarantee their safety and proper disbursement and use.

Article VI

The subordinate officers of the community council shall perform 
such duties as the community council may from time to time provide 
by resolution.

Article VII

The order of business at any regular or special meeting of the 

community council shall be as follows:

1.  Council called to order.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the council treasurer.
6.  Reading of communications.
7.  Unfinished business.
8.  New business.
9.  Adjournment.

Article VIII

Ratification of constitution and by-laws.—This constitution and by
laws, when adopted by a majority vote of the voters of the Kashia 
Band of Pomo Indians voting at a special election called by the 
Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 30 percent of those entitled 
to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior 
for his approval, and shall be in force from the date of such approval.

Certification of Adoption

Pursuant to an order, approved January 16, 1936, by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was submitted 
for ratification to the adult Indians residing on the Stewarts Point 
Rancheria and was, on February 8, 1936, duly accepted by a vote of 
47 for and 2 against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those 
entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended 
by the act of June 15, 1935 (Pub. No. 147, 74th Cong.).

John R. Smith, 
Chairman of Election Board.
Allen H. James, 
Secretary of Election Board.

Roy Nash,

Superintendent In Charge of the Rancheria.

I,  Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached constitution and by-laws of the Kashia Band of Pomo 
Indians of the Stewarts Point Rancheria.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution or 
by-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to the Kashia Band of Pomo 
Indians of the Stewarts Point Rancheria.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended February 28, 1936.

William Zimmerman, Jr., 

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., March 11, 1936.

Charles West, 

Acting Secretary of the Interior.

[seal] 

