DATE DOWNLOADED: Tue Jul 12 17:32:07 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas (1989).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas (1989).

APA 7th ed.
(1989). Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas (S.I.: s.n., 1989)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas (s.n., 1989

MLA 9th ed.
Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.
 
 

CONSTITUTION OF THE 
KICKAPOO TRADITIONAL TRIBE OF TEXAS

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Texas Band of Kickapoo, by virtue of our sovereign 
rights as an Indian Tribe and pursuant to the authorities conferred by the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), and Public law 
97-429, do hereby organize as a Tribe separate and apart from the Kickapoo 
Tribe of Oklahoma for the well-being of the Band and its members, to direct 
and control our own affairs, to protect and develop our land and resources 
for ourselves and our children, and to ensure the political integrity and 
cultural identity of the Band, and for these purposes do adopt this 
Constitution for the Texas Band of Kickapoo, henceforth to be known as the 
Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas.
 
 

ARTICLE I - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, hereinafter 
referred to as the Tribe, shall extend to the extent permitted by federal 
law, to all lands placed in trust for the Tribe pursuant to Public Law 
97-429, known as the Kickapoo Village, to all additional lands which may be 
acquired by the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, to all lands which may 
be acquired by the United States and held in trust for the Tribe, and to all 
other lands over which the Tribe may exercise jurisdiction under federal 
law.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas shall 
consist of the following persons:

(a)  All persons of Kickapoo Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official roil of the Texas Band of Kickapoo dated November 8, 1987, 
and to those enrolled through November 8, 1988; and

(b)  All children born to a tribal member who are at least one-fourth

(1/4) degree Kickapoo Indian blood

Section 2. Fran and after the adoption of this Constitution, persons who 
are members of other federally recognized Indian Tribes who are at least 1/4 
degree Kickapoo Indian blood may apply for membership in the Tribe provided: 
1) they have relinquished their membership in the other Tribe; 2) they have 
resided within the jurisdiction of the Tribe as defined in Article I for 
three (3) years; and 3) the application for membership is approved by the 
Membership Committee.

Section 3. No person shall be a member of the Tribe who is enrolled or 
recognized as a member in any other tribe, unless he or she relinquishes 
membership in such other tribe pending enrollment with the Kickapoo 
Traditional Tribe of Texas by submitting to the Tribe a conditional 
relinquishment form properly executed. Upon acceptance of enrollment in the 
Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, the member shall provide evidence that 
his or her name has been stricken firm the rolls of such other Tribe.

Section 4. The Traditional Council shall have the power to prescribe rules 
and regulations by ordinance no inconsistent with this Article governing all 
matters pertaining to membership.

Section 5. Within a reasonable time after the adoption of the Constitution, 
the Traditional Council shall appoint a Membership Committee composed of 
three tribal members who shall serve four (4) year terms, except no 
Committee member shall serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. The 
Membership Committee shall act on all applications for membership and other 
issues relating to membership. Decisions of the Membership Committee may be 
appealed to the Traditional Council which shall render final decisions. 
Persons appealing to the Traditional Council on membership matters shall be 
entitled to a hearing after proper notice. Members of the Membership 
Committee may be removed only through the recall procedure set out in 
Article VI, Section 4.
 
 

ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Tribe shall be the Traditional Council 
which shall be composed of five (5) adult members of the Tribe meeting the 
qualifications set forth in Article V and elected at large by secret ballot 
of the qualified voters of the Tribe.

Section 2. The Traditional Council shall select one of its male members as 
Chairman, and shall select a Secretary and Treasurer from among its members.

Section 3. Traditional Council Meetings

(a) Quorum Three (3) members of the Traditional Council shall 
constitute a quorum of that body. No enactment of the Traditional 
Council will be valid in the absence of a quorum.

(b)

Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Traditional Council 
shall be held quarterly unless otherwise designated by the Chairman 
with concurrence of the Traditional Council, provided that notice 
shall be given to the membership of the Tribe at least thirty (30) 
days in advance specifying the date, time and place of the meeting 
and provided that at least two regular meetings shall be held at 
the Kickapoo Village.

(c)  Special Meetings Special meetings of the Traditional Council may 
be called by the Chairman at his discretion, except that special 
meetings shall be called by the Chairman within fifteen (15) days 
of a written request of a majority of the Traditional Council 
members. upon refusal by the Chairman to call a special meeting 
within fifteen (15) days upon a written request of a majority of 
the Traditional Council, any member of the Traditional Council may 
exercise such authority.

(d)  Annual General Membership Meeting. There shall be an annual 
general meeting of the tribal membership called by the Chairman of 
the Traditional Council to be held the third Saturday of November. 
The chairman of the Traditional Council shall present a report to 
the membership of the activity of the Traditional Council of the 
past year, and shall outline preposed plans and activities for the 
caning year. Notice of the Annual General Membership Meeting shall 
be given by the Secretary of the Traditional Council at least 
thirty (30) days in advance.

(e)  Special General Membership Meetings. Special General Membership 
meetings may be called by the Chairman of the Traditional Council 
provided that notice of such meeting shall be given at least 
fourteen (14) days prior to such meeting. Upon receipt of a valid 
petition signed by at least 100 eligible voters of the Tribe, the 
Chairman shall call a Special General Membership meeting within 
forty-five (45) days of receipt of the petition.

Section 1. Chairman
 
 

ARTICLE IV - DOTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 The Chairman of the Traditional Council shall preside over all meetings of 
the Traditional Council and the Annual General Membership Meeting and shall 
have general responsibility for the business of the Tribe and shall perform 
all duties delegated to him by the Traditional Council. In the absence of 
the Chairman, an acting Chairman may be selected by a majority of the 
Traditional Council.

section 2. Secretary

The Secretary of the Traditional Council shall keep an accurate record of 
all proceedings and enactments of the Traditional Council, and shall file 
copies with the Tribal office as public records and shall perform such other 
duties as may be directed by the Traditional Council. All official records 
of the Secretary shall be open to public inspection during normal business 
hours in the Secretary or secretary designee's presence.

Section 3. Treasurer

The Treasurer of the Traditional Council shall accept, receive, preserve and 
safeguard all funds and assets of the Tribe from any source and keep an 
accurate account thereof; and shall make disbursements of funds only in 
accordance with properly executed resolutions of the Traditional Council. 
The Treasurer shall keep all funds entrusted to his care in special bank 
accounts and shall file a bond with the Secretary of the Traditional Council 
in an amount satisfactory to the Traditional council; the cost of such bond 
shall be paid by the Tribe. The records and accounts of the Tribe shall be 
open for public inspection during normal business hours in the presence of 
the Treasurer or his designee.

Section 1.  Regular Elections
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Elections shall be held every two (2) years on the third Saturday in 
November with the members being selected to fill the positions with terms 
expiring that year on the Traditional council. Following the first election 
conducted under this Constitution all terms of office shall be for four (4) 
years or until successors are duly elected and installed. Members of the 
Traditional Council shall be selected by secret ballot.

Section 2.  Special Elections

In the event a special election is required by any provision of this 
constitution, it shall be called by the Election Board and ba governed by 
the Election Ordinance. All special elections shall be held at the earliest 
possible time during the period October through April, provided at least 
thirty (30) days notice is given.

Section 3.  Eligible Voters

Each tribal member as defined in Article II of this Constitution shall have 
the right to vote in any tribal election, provided such member: 1) is at 
least eighteen (18) years of age at the time of such election; and 2) has 
resided within the jurisdiction of the Tribe as defined in Article I for at 
least three (3) years at the time of the election. Residency shall be 
determined by a voter registration procedure to be set forth in the Election 
ordinance.

Section 4.  Election Board and Ordinance

(a)

The Traditional Council shall appoint an Election Board consisting 
of three tribal members who shall administer and supervise all 
tribal elections. The Election Board shall resolve all matters 
pertaining to qualifications of prospective candidates, secret 
balloting, filing procedures, election disputes, and all other

matters pertaining to or arising from tribal elections. The 
Election Board shall call and conduct all tribal elections in 
accordance with a tribal Election Ordinance. Members of the 
Election Board shall serve four (4) year terms, except no Board 
member may serve more than two (2) consecutive terms. The Election 
Board shall select a Chairman and Secretary from among the Board 
members. Members of the Election Board may be removed only through 
the recall procedure set out in Article VI, Section 4, except that 
if the Election Board refuses to call any election required by this 
Constitution, the Board members forfeit their position and the 
Traditional Council may appoint new members Members of the 
Traditional Council may not be appointed to the Election Board.

(b)

All tribal elections shall be conducted in accordance with an 
Election Ordinance enacted by the Traditional Council consistent 
with this Constitution. Such ordinance shall

provide procedures for all aspects of elections, and shall also 
provide for the conduct of initiative, recall, removal, and 
 referendum elections, and a uniform petitioning procedure. Notice 
of all regular and special elections and meetings shall be posted 
in at least three (3) public placed within the Kickapoo village.

Section 5.  Qualifications of Candidates

Any person who desires to become a candidate for election or appointment to 
Traditional Council shall meet the qualifications set forth below:

(a)  must be a tribal member as defined in Article II of this 
Constitution, and must have been a member for the three (3) years 
immediately preceding the election in which office is sought;

(b) must be at lest thirty-five (35) years of age

(c)  must not have been convicted of a felony in the united States or a 
similar offense in Mexico by a final judgment of any court of 
competent jurisdiction, must not have intentionally harmed another 
tribal member with a dangerous weapon and must not have converted 
tribal funds or property to his or her personal use; and

(d)  must reside within the jurisdiction of the Tribe as defined in 
Article I for the three (3) years immediately preceding the 
election in which office is sought.

Section 6.  First Election

The first election shall be called by the Election Board for the third 
Saturday in November, 1991. Until a Traditional Council is installed 
following the first election, the tribal members designated below shall 
constitute the Traditional Council, and may exercise all powers conferred by 
this constitution.

Raul Garza, AKA Makateonenodua 
Juan B. Gonzales, AKA Kechemo 
Adolfo Anico, AKA Pemosaaua 
Pepe Trevino, AKA Pepisidia 
Vicente Lopez, AKA Chakapahthohah

For the first election the two members of the Traditional Council receiving 
the fewest number of votes shall serve for two (2) year terms; the remaining 
members shall serve for four year terms. Thereafter all members of the 
Traditional council shall serve four (4) year terms. In the event of a tie 
vote among three or more Council members with the lowest number of votes, 
after the Chairman is elected, the Election Board shall supervise the 
drawing of lots among those remaining members with tie votes to determine 
those members who shall serve two (2) year terms.

Section 7. Installation of Traditional Council

All duly elected members of the Traditional Council shall take office within 
seven (7) days following the election.

Section 8. condensation

The Traditional Council may by unanimous vote prescribe condensation for 
members of the Traditional Council as it deems advisable from available 
funds.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES, REMOVAL, FORFEITURE, RECALL

 
 Section 1.-  Vacancies

If a member of the Traditional council is removed, recalled, resigns, 
forfeits office, or the office otherwise become vacant, the Traditional 
Council shall appoint a person who meeting the qualifications for election 
to office to serve the remainder of that term, except if more than two (2) 
years remain in the term, a special election shall be held to fill the 
position.

Section 2.  Removal

The Traditional Council may by majority vote remove any member for neglect 
of duty or gross misconduct. Before any vote for removal is taken, the 
member shall be given a written statement of the charges against him at 
least thirty (30) days before the date of the meeting at which the vote is 
scheduled, and an opportunity to appear and answer all charges at such 
designated meeting. The decision of the Traditional council shall be final 
and any removed council member shall not be returned to office for a period 
of at least six years.

Section 3.  Recall

Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least one hundred (100) 
eligible voters of the Tribe demanding recall of a member or members of the 
Traditional Council, Election Board, Membership Committee or Appeals Board, 
the Election Board shall call a special election within forty-five (45) 
days. No council member or other tribal official may be recalled unless at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters of the Tribe vote in the 
special election, and a majority of those voting cast their ballot in favor 
of recall. Recall of a Council member which has been submitted to the 
voters and rejected shall not be considered again for at least twelve (12) 
months. Only one official shall be considered for recall in any given 
election.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - POWERS OF TRADITIONAL COUNCIL

 
 All powers of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, including but not 
limited to those powers conferred by section 16 of the Act of June 18, 1934 
(25 U.S.C. 465), shall be exercised by the Traditional Council subject only 
to limitations imposed by the laws or constitution of the united states, 
including but not limited to the following powers:

a.  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments;

b.  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior as long as such 
approval is required;

c.  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance by any person or 
entity other than by the Traditional Council as provided in this 
section, of tribal lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets 
without the consent of the tribe;

d.  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation 
estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Kickapoo 
Traditional Tribe of Texas;

e.  To purchase, take by gift or bequest, or otherwise, cwn, hold, manage, 

operate, and dispose of property real and personal including the power 
to purchase restricted Indian land;

f.  To lease and make assignments of tribal land in accordance with the law;

g.  To exercise powers necessary to the conduct of business, including 

entering into contracts and agreements and borrowing money;

h.  To manage and regulate all tribal economic affairs and activities;

i.  To appropriate funds;

j.  To safeguard the peace, safety, welfare and political integrity of the 
Tribe by enacting appropriate resolutions or ordinances for this 
purpose;

k.  To levy taxes and license fees;

1.  To exclude unauthorized persons from land within the jurisdiction of the 

Tribe.

m.  To determine and regulate tribal membership;

n.  To regulate and maintain law and order on lands within the Tribe's 

jurisdiction;

o.  To provide for the administration of justice by establishing tribal 

courts;

p.  To condemn lands for public purposes;

q.  To regulate the use and disposition of property;

r.  To charter and regulate subordinate organizations and cooperative 

associations;

s.  To regulate the inheritance of property, including trust and restricted 

property, to the extent authorized by law;

t.  To regulate domestic relations and other internal affairs of the Tribe;

u.  To appoint guardians;

v.  To encourage arts and crafts;

w.  To regulate tribal elections;

x.  To regulate the conduct of the Traditional Council itself and of tribal 

meetings.

Section 2.  Committees and Boards

The Traditional Council may appoint other officials, committees or boards 
and delegate responsibilities thereto as may be required from time to time. 
The duties, responsibilities and compensation for such officials, committee 
members or board members shall be set by the Traditional Council.

Section 3.  Future Powers

The Traditional Council may exercise such further powers as may in the 
future be conferred by federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 Legislative enactments of the Traditional Council shall be embodied in 
ordinances, and decisions of the Traditional Council of limited or temporary 
duration shall be embodied in resolutions, and all such ordinances and 
resolutions shall be available for public inspection.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. Initiative

Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least one hundred (100) 
eligible voters of the Tribe, it shall be the duty of the Chairman of the 
Traditional Council to call within forty-five (45) days an initiative 
election for the purpose of presenting to all qualified voters such issue 
requested by the initiative, except that no initiative election may be held 
for the purpose of voting on whether to distribute any tribal funds as per 
capita payments. The initiative vote shall be conclusive and binding on the 
Traditional Council provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
eligible voters shall vote in the election. No initiative shall serve to 
abrogate, modify or amend any properly approved contract or agreement.

Section 2. Referendum

Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by one hundred 9100) eligible voters 
of the Tribe, or upon request of a majority of the Traditional Council, any 
enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution or other action of the 
Traditional Council shall be submitted to a popular referendum in an 

election called by the Chairman and held within forty-five (45) days of the 
receipt of the petition or request. The referendum vote shall be conclusive 
and binding on the Traditional council provided that at least thirty percent 
(30%) of eligible voters shall vote in the election. No referendum shall 
serve to abrogate, modify or amend any properly approved contract or 
agreement.

Section 3. Whenever possible, any initiative or referendum election shall 
be held in conjunction with any scheduled regular or special Traditional 
Council meeting or General Membership Meeting.

Section 4. No initiative or referendum which has been submitted to the 
members and rejected shall be considered again for at least twelve (12) 
months.
 
 

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS AND OTHER PERSONS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas residing 
within the jurisdiction of the Tribe as defined in Article I shall enjoy 
equal rights to life, liberty, industrial pursuits, and the economic 
resources and activities of the Tribe.

Section 2. The Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas, in exercising its 
powers of self-government shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, 
or abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right 
of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress 
of grievances;

(b)  Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers and effects against unreasonable search and 
seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon probably cause, supported by 
oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched and the person or thing to be. seized;

(c)  Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in 

jeopardy;

(d)  Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against 

himself;

(e)  Take any private property for a public use without just 

compensation;

(f)  Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy 
and public trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to

have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and 
at his own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his 
defense;

(g)  Require excessive bail, inpose excessive fines, inflict cruel and 
unusual punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any 
one offense any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for 
a term of one (1) year or a fine of $5,000.00 or both, or such 
other terms or penalties as may be authorized by federal law;

(h)  Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of 
its laws or deprive any person of liberty or property without due 
process of law;

(i)  Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or;

(j)  Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment 
the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than six 
persons.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - APPEALS BOARD

 
 In the absence of the establishment by the Traditional Council of a court 
system or other permanent dispute resolution mechanism, an Appeals Board 
shall be established within a reasonable time after the adoption and 
approval by the Secretary of the Interior of the constitution. The Appeals 
Board shall consist of three tribal members appointed by the Traditional 
council for four (4) year terms, except no board member may serve more than 
two (2) consecutive terms. The Board must satisfy the same eligibility 
requirements as candidates for the Traditional Council. The Appeals Board 
shall only hear appeals from final decisions of the Election Board, from 
shall decisions of the Traditional Council regarding removal of council 
members, and disputes concerning forfeiture of office or the calling of 
regular or special meetings of the Traditional council or the General 
Membership. Ths Appeals Board may only decide issues of procedure as set 
forth in the Constitution or ordinances, and issues of fact. Decisions of 
the Appeals Board shall be majority vote and shall be final. The Appeals 
Board shall adopt appropriate rules and regulations concerning procedures 
for appeals, including at a minimum the right to adequate notice, the right 
to a hearing and to ba represented at the hearing, and the opportunity to 
present evidence and to hear evidence against him or her. Board members 
shall be independent and impartial, and shall not sign any petitions for 
initiatives, referendums, recall or the calling of meetings. Members of the 
Board may only be removed through the recall procedures set out in Article 
VI, Section 4. Members of the Traditional Council may not be appointed to 
the Appeals Board. Upon the establishment of a court system and/or other 
dispute resolution mechanism with authority to hear the appeals and disputes 
covered by this Article, the Appeals Board shall be disbanded.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a valid petition signed 
by at least one hundred fifty (150) qualified voters, or by a majority vote 
of the Traditional Council. Upon receipt of a proposed amendment, a special 
election shall be call by the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to 
applicable regulations.

If in such election at least thirty percent (30%) of eligible voters of the 
Tribe vote in the election, and the amendment is adopted by a majority vote, 2. 
it shall be in effect upon approval by the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All ordinances and resolutions heretofore enacted by the Traditional Council 
shall remain in full force and effect except to the extent they are 
inconsistent with this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any part of this Constitution is held by a Federal Court of competent 
jurisdiction to be invalid or contrary to the U. S. Constitution or federal 
law, the remainder of the constitution shall remain in full force and 
effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters 
of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas voting in an election called for 
that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, and conducted pursuant to 
federal regulations, provided, that at least thirty percent (30%) of those 
entitled to vote cast ballots in that election, shall become effective when 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order issued by John Geary, Acting Deputy to the 
Assistant Secretary of the Interior,• Indian Affairs, on
April 21, 1989____________ , the Constitution of the Kickapoo
Traditional Tribe of Texas, was submitted for adoption to the 
qualified voters of the Kickapoo Traditional Tribe of Texas and 
was on May 27, 1989 duly adopted by a vote of

132 for, and 15 against, in an election in which at 
least thirty percent (30%) of the 198 persons entitled to 
vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Date: 5.27.89

certificate of approval
I, Hazel E. Elbert, Deputy to the Assistant

Secretary - Indian Affairs (Tribal Services), by virtue of the 
authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June
18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to me by 209 D.M.
8.3., do hereby approve the constitution of the Kickapoo Traditional
tribe of Texas that was duly adopted on May 27, 1989;
provided, that nothing in this approval shall be construed as 
authorizing any action under the constitution that would be contrary 
to Federal law.

Washington, D.C. Date: JUL 11 1989

