 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 
THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED SEPTEMBER 18, 1937 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON: 1938 
 

CONSTITUTION OF THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF 
OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the Kickapoo Indians of Oklahoma, in order to promote our 
common welfare and to secure to ourselves and our descendants the 
rights, powers and privileges offered by the Thomas-Rogers Okla
homa Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do estab
lish this organization and adopt the following Constitution and 
By-laws pursuant to that Act.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Kickapoo Tribe of 

Oklahoma.

Article II—Membership oe Tribe

The membership of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma shall consist 

of the following persons:

Section 1. All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on 

the official census roll of the Tribe as of January 1, 1937.

Sec. 2. All children bom since the date of said roll, both of whose 

parents are members of the Tribe.

Sec. 3. Any child born of a marriage between a member of the 
Kickapoo Tribe and a member of any other Indian tribe who chooses 
to affiliate with the Kickapoo Tribe.

Sec. 4. Any child born of a marriage between a member of the 
Kickapoo Tribe and any other person, if such child is admitted to 
membership by the Council of the Kickapoo Tribe.

Sec. 5. The Business Committee shall have the power to make rules 
and regulations, subject to review of the Secretary of the Interior, 
governing the adoption of members not otherwise provided for in this 
Constitution and By-laws.

Article III—Membership of Council

The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be the Kickapoo 
Council. The membership of the Council shall be all the members 
of the Kickapoo Tribe, 21 years of age and older, residing in 
Oklahoma.

Article IV—Officers

Section 1. The officers of this Tribe shall be the Chairman, Vice
Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer, and one Councilman. The term of 
officers shall be for two years, or until their successors are elected and 
installed.

Article V—Committees

Section 1. There shall be a Business Committee which shall con
sist of the officers and councilman as provided in Article IV. This 
committee shall have power to transact business and otherwise speak 
or act on behalf of the Tribe in all matters on which the Tribe is 
empowered to act. The powers of the Tribe shall be set forth in 
detail in the corporate charter to be requested by the Business Com
mittee.

Sec. 2. Grievance Committee.—This committee shall consist of 
three members who shall be elected by the Council and shall not 
include any members of the Business Committee.

Article VI—Meetings

Section 1. Annual meetings of the Council shall be held on the 
first Wednesday of June for the purpose of receiving reports and 
transacting any other business which may come regularly before the 
Council.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Council may be called at the discre
tion of the Chairman, and shall be called by him upon the written 
request of a majority of the Business Committee or upon the written 
request of twenty-five members of the Tribe or pursuant to a vote of 
the Council at any meeting, provided that at least ten days’ notice 
shall be given in each instance.

Sec. 3. The principal object of a special council meeting must be 
stated in the call for same and may include the words “and for the 
transaction of other business that may be presented.” Unless these 
words are added no other business can be transacted except for the 
object stated in the call.

Sec. 4. The regular meetings of the Business Committee shall be 
held on the first Wednesday in each month unless otherwise provided 
by resolution.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
by the Chairman at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon 
the written request of three members of the Business Committee.

Article VII—Elections

Section 1. Within 30 days after the adoption of this Constitution 
and By-laws, an election of officers and members of the Grievance 
Committee shall be held by the Council. The officers and members 
of the Grievance Committee elected at this election shall serve till 
the next regular election provided for in section 2 of this Article 
or until their successors are elected and installed.

Sec. 2. Regular elections of officers and members of the Grievance 
Committee shall be held by the Council at its regular annual meeting 
on the first Wednesday in June, 1939, and on the first Wednesday in 
June of each second year thereafter.

Sec. 3. Election shall be by standing vote, a majority vote of the 
membership present being necessary to elect, "Where there are more 
than two candidates for an office and no one receives a majority vote, 
the low candidate shall be eliminated and voting shall proceed until 

one candidate receives a majority of the votes cast. Nominations 
may be made from the floor. The newly elected officers shall be 
installed immediately upon their elections.

Article VIII—Vacancies

Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled for an unexpired 

term at any special or regular meeting of the Council.

Article IX—Removal of Officers

The Grievance Committee shall investigate complaints of mis
conduct in office of the members of the Business Committee and 
upon a proper showing shall call a special meeting of the Council 
to act upon such complaints. The Council shall have power, by a 
majority vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him 
from office and proceed to elect a successor.

Article X—Bill of Rights

Section 1. All members of the Tribe shall enjoy without hin
drance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and 
association.

Sec. 2. This Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or 
otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of this 
Tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the United States.

Sec. 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Tribe 
shall not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions 
of this Constitution and By-laws without the consent of such indi
vidual member.

Article XI—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and the attached By-laws may be 
proposed by a majority vote of the Business Committee or by a peti
tion signed by thirty per cent of the adult members of the Tribe, and 
if approved by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to 
a referendum vote of the adult members of the Tribe, and shall be 
effective if approved by a majority of the votes cast.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE KICKAPOO TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman.—The Chairman shall preside at all meetings 
of the Council and of the Business Committee. He shall have gen
eral supervision of the affairs of the Council and of the Business 
Committee and shall perform all duties appertaining to the office of 
Chairman.

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman.—In the absence of the Chairman, the Vice- 
Chairman shall perform the duties of that office. In case of vacancy, 
the Vice-Chairman shall succeed at once to the office of the Chairman 
until the next special or regular election for the office of Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary.—The Secretary shall keep an accurate account of 
all proceedings and official records of the Council and of the Business 

Committee. He shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient 
handling of all correspondence pertaining to the business of the 
Council and of the Business Committee. All official records of the 
Secretary shall be open to inspection by the members of the Council, 
in the presence of the Secretary, upon the order of the Grievance 
Committee. He shall keep a correct list of all members of the Coun
cil, shall authenticate all accounts or orders of the Council and, in 
the absence of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall call meetings 
to order until a chairman pro tem is elected. He shall render a 
written report at the annual Council meeting and, at the expiration 
of his term of office, the records and all papers in his possession shall 
be turned over to his successor.

Sec. 4. Treasurer.—The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all 
funds in possession of the Council from any source. He shall keep an 
accurate record of all such funds and shall disburse the same in ac
cordance with the vote of the Business Committee. He shall render 
a written report at the annual Council meeting and at such times that 
he is requested to do so by the Business Committee. He shall keep all 
tribal moneys entrusted to his care in a special account. At any time 
that such account shall amount to more than $50, he shall file a bond 
satisfactory to the Business Committee, and the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of tribal 
money. At the expiration of his term of office, the records and all 
papers and funds in his possession shall be turned over to his 
successor.

Article II—Qualifications of Officers

Any person elected to membership on the Business Committee shall 
be not less than 21 years of age and a member of the Kickapoo Tribe 
of Oklahoma. At the time of his election, he shall be a bona fide 
resident of the territory known as the Shawnee Indian Agency juris
diction in Oklahoma. Any person holding an elective office removing 
from the Shawnee Agency jurisdiction shall automatically lose office.

Article III—Place of Meetings

All regular and special meetings of the Council and of the Business 
Committee shall be held at the Kickapoo Community House unless 
some other point under the Shawnee Agency jurisdiction is desig
nated in the call or notice.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Twenty-five members of the Council shall constitute a 

quorum to transact business at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Three members of the Business Committee shall constitute 

a quorum to transact business at any meeting.

Article V—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the 

members of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma voting at an election 
called by the Secretary of the Interior under rules and regulations 
promulgated pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Welfare Act of 
June 26, 1936.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 
me by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-Laws of the Kickapoo Tribe of 
Oklahoma.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
and By-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to the Kickapoo Tribe 
of Oklahoma.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended August 11, 1937.

William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

Washington, D. C., August 18, 1937.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved August 18, 1937 by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Kickapoo Tribe of 
Oklahoma and was on September 18, 1937 duly approved by a vote of 
64 for, and 26 against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant to Section 3 of the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

George Kishketon, 
Chairman, Business Committee.
Sweeney Stevens,

Member Business Committee and Kickapoo

(Secretary absent.)

Election Board.

. 

F. E. Perkins,

Superintendent, Shawnee Indian Agency, Oklahoma.

