 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 

OF THE

KICKAPOO TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma, in order to establish 
a more perfect organization, promote our common welfare, conserve 
and develop our lands and resources and secure to ourselves and our 
descendants certain rights, powers and privileges of self-government 
not inconsistent with our treaties and Federal laws do establish this 
organization and adopt the following Constitution and Bylaws pursuant 
to the Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936.

This document supersedes the original Constitution and Bylaws and its 
amendments. Such document was initially approved by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior on August 18, 1937, and ratified by the qualified 
voters of the Tribe on September 18, 1937.

The seat of Government for the Tribe shall be in the vicinity of McLoud, 
Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this federally recognized organization shall be the Kickapoo 
Tribe of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 As may be authorized under Federal law the territorial jurisdiction 
of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma shall extend to all tribally owned 
land and all land belonging to Tribal members within the exterior 
boundaries of the original Kickapoo Indian Reservation in Oklahoma 
Territory, including trust allotments, and to such other lands as may 
hereafter be acquired or reserved on behalf of the Kickapoo Tribe 
of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma shall 
consist of the following persons, provided; they have not received 
land or money by virtue of being enrolled as members of another Tribe:

(a)  All original Kickapoo of Oklahoma allottees and persons 
not allotted but determined eligible to have received an 
allotment. Persons who acquire membership under this 

paragraph shall be considered as full blood members of 
the Tribe.

(b)  All persons whose names appear on the approved membership 
roll of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma prepared as of 
October 6, 1972.

(c)  All persons who met the requirements for enrollment in 
effect as of October 6, 1972, but whose names do not appear 
on the roll of that date.

(d)  All persons born to a Tribal member after October 6, 1972, 
who are of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Kickapoo of Oklahoma 
Indian blood as defined by and derived from Section 1(a).

Sec. 2. The Business Committee shall have power to prescribe rules and 
regulations, consistent with the provisions of Section 1 above, subject to 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, governing future membership, 
including adoptions and the loss of membership.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - KICKAPOO COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Membership. The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be 
the Kickapoo Council. The membership of the Council shall be all the 
members of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma, eighteen (18) years of age 
or older.

Sec, 2. Powers. The governing power of the Council shall be exercised 
through:

(a)  Election of officers - Article VII;

(b)  Recall - Article IX;.

(c)  Referendum - Article XII;

(d)  Ordinances - Article XV;

(e)  Amendments to Constitution and Bylaws - Article XXII.

Final decisions relating to claims or rights growing out of treaties shall 
be made by referendum of the Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - COMMITTEES AND BOARDS

 
 Section 1. The Business Committee shall consist of five (5) members 
elected from trie membership of the Kickapoo Council and shall include 
the following officers: Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer 
and Councilman. The Business Committee shall hold its official meetings 
at the seat of the Tribal Government.

(a)  Powers. The legislative and executive powers of the Tribe, 
which have not been reserved to the Kickapoo Council through
Article IV, shall be vested in the Business Committee. Except as 
otherwise provided in this Constitution and Bylaws and the Tribe's 
Corporate Charter, the Business Committee shall have power to 
transact business and otherwise speak or act on behalf of the tribe 
in all matters on which the Tribe is empowered to act including the 
employment of legal counsel, however, the choice of counsel and 
fixing of fees shall be subject to approval by the Secretary of the 
Interior. The exercise of Tribal powers shall be subject to any 
limitations imposed by Federal statute or the Constitution of
the United States. Proposed ordinances which serve to limit the 
powers of the Business Committee shall be subject to Referendum 
procedures.

(b)  The Business Committee shall preside over all meetings of the 
Council arid shall have the power to appoint to special committees or 
boards those members of the Tribe who have constructive criticisms and 
suggestions to make concerning Tribal affairs and can delegate to such 
boards or committees authority and responsibility for the performance 
of special tasks.

Sec. 2. Grievance Committee. This Committee shall consist of three 
(3) members, a Chairman, Vice-Chairman and Secretary elected in the 
same manner as members of the Business Committee. The sole 
responsibility of the Grievance Committee shall be to resolve 
grievances of the Tribal members relating to the conduct of Tribal 
officers pursuant to Article IX of this Constitution and Bylaws. The 
Grievance Committee shall adopt a resolution which shall establish the 
duties Of its members and its procedures. The Grievance Committee 
shall be impartial in its handling of complaints. It shall neither solicit 
support for or against any grievance submitted to that Committee. 
Accordingly, its members shall not sign petitions involving complaints 
to be submitted to that Committee, nor shall members of that Committee 
circulate such petitions.

Sec. 3. Election Board. There shall be an Election Board appointed 
for the purpose of calling and conducting all Tribal elections and 

referendums pursuant to the terms of this Constitution and Bylaws. 
Members of the Election Board shall serve terms of three (3) years and 
shall be appointed pursuant to Article VII of this Constitution and Bylaws.

Sec. 4. The term of office for members of the Business Committee 
and the Grievance Committee shall be for three (3) years from the date 
of installation or until their successors are duly elected and installed; 
provided, the office of Chairman shall not be occupied by the same person 
more than two (2) consecutive terms. At the completion of his second 
consecutive term of office, the Chairman of either Committee shall 
not be eligible for reelection or appointment to fill any vacancy until 
a period of one (1) year has elapsed.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - QUALIFICATIONS OF CANDIDATES

 
 Before being declared a candidate for any elective or appointive office, 
bach prospective candidate must sign an affidavit attesting that the 
following qualifications have been met:

(a) An enrolled member of the Tribe.

(b) At least twenty-one (21) years of age at the time of 
election or appointment.

(c) Physically resided in the State of Oklahoma for at least 
six (6) months immediately prior to the date of election or 
appointment.

(d) In cases where a prospective candidate has been 
convicted of a felony or crime involving dishonesty or 
moral turpitude, such person shall not be eligible for 
consideration as a candidate until at least ten (10) years 
have passed following completion of the penalty for such 
conviction(s).

(e) Candidates for the office of Secretary and Treasurer 
shall also meet those minimum qualifications set forth in 
Article XXI.

(f) No person shall be at the same time a candidate for more 
that one (1) elective or appointive office.

.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
  Section 1. The Election Board shall be appointed for three (3) year 
terms in the following manner:

One (1) member shall be appointed by the Business Committee;
one (1) member shall be appointed by the Grievance
Committee, and the third member shall be appointed by 
the first two (2) members of the Election Board. In 
the event a vacancy occurs on the Election Board, such 
vacancy shall be filled by appointment by the committee or board 
making the initial appointment. Such appointees shall meet 
all qualifications specified in Article VI of this Constitution 
and Bylaws.

Sec. 2. Election Board Powers. The Election Board shall have authority 
to call and conduct Tribal elections and referendums pursuant to the terms 
of this Constitution and Bylaws and in accordance with the Election Ordinance.

Sec. 3. An Election Ordinance shall be drafted by the Business Committee 
within six (6) months following the effective date of this Constitution 
and Bylaws, and submitted for enactment by the Council at its next 
annual meeting, Such Ordinance shall be in compliance with this 
Constitution and Bylaws and shall include, but not be limited to, the 
following provisions:

(a)  Secret balloting;

(b)  Interpreters, as needed;

(c)  Handling protests and settling election disputes;

(d)  Petitioning;

(e)  Tribal referendum elections;

(f)  Recall elections;

(g)  Avoidance of conflict of interest;

(h)  Special elections to fill vacancies mentioned in Section 1 
of Article X;

(i)  Election by majority vote with provision for runoffs; 

.

(j) 

Initiative elections;

(k) Nominating candidates (see Section 7 of this Article).

Sec. 4. Election Date. Annual elections to elect members of the 
Business Committee and Grievance Committee shall be held on the
 
 

 
 
 second Saturday in June; Provided, that in the event of an emergency 
such election may be conducted on a Saturday no later than thirty (30) 
days following the regular election date, except as provided in Section 5 
of this Article.

Sec. 5. First Election. Those Tribal officials elected pursuant to the 
previous Constitution and Bylaws in June 1977 and who are in office when 
this Constitution and Bylaws becomes effective, shall continue to serve for 
the remainder of their terms of office, or until their successors are 
duly elected and installed pursuant to this Constitution and Bylaws. The 
first regular election of officers under this Constitution and Bylaws shall 
take place in June 1979, at which time a system of staggered terms 
of office shall be initiated. At the June 1979, election, a Chairman and 
Treasurer shall each be elected to serve a three (3) year term'of office. 
A Vice-Chairman and a Secretary shall each be elected to serve for a 
two (2) year term; and the Councilman shall be elected to a one (1) year 
term of office. Regarding the Grievance Committee, the Chairman shall 
be elected for a three (3) year term, the Vice-Chairman for two (2)
years and the Secretary shall be elected for a one (1) year term of office 
at the June 1979, election.

Thereafter, there shall be annual elections in June and each of the 
above mentioned officials shall be elected for three (3) year terms of 
office or until their successors are duly elected and installed in order 
to maintain a system of staggered terms of office.

Sec. 6. Voter Qualifications. All members of the Kickapoo Council 
shall be qualified voters."

Sec, 7. Nominations. The time, place and manner of the nomination 
process shall be included in the Election Ordinance adopted pursuant 
to Section 3 of this Article. In addition, each nominee shall be required 
to sign an affidavit attesting that he meets the qualifications pursuant 
to Article VI prior to being certified as a candidate.

Sec. 8. Installation of Officers. The first thirty (30) days following 
each regular election of' Tribal officials shall serve as a transition 
period between the outgoing and newly elected or appointed Tribal officials. 
The outgoing officials shall provide such assistance as is necessary to 
accomplish a trouble-free transition. At the conclusion of this period 
the outgoing officials shall transfer all Tribal documents, files and 
correspondence to the new incumbents. Such documents accumulated 
or otherwise entrusted to that individual during his term of office shall

 be considered the property of the Tribe and not the individual.

Successful candidates shall be formally installed in office during a 
special meeting of the Business Committee called primarily for that 
purpose. Such meeting shall be called not less than thirty (30) nor more 
than forty (40) days from the date of the election of all officers. Installation 

may be accomplished at the regularly scheduled quarterly meeting of the 
Business Committee, provided, the above time limits are satisfied.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - OATH OF OFFICE

 
 No elected official of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma shall be officially 
installed in the office to which he was elected until and unless the 
following oath has been duly administered by the Chairman of the 
Election Board:

"l,____________________, do solemnly swear that
I will support and defend the Constitution of the United
States; that I will faithfully and impartially carry out 
the duties of my office, uphold the Constitution, Bylaws, 
and Corporate Charter of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma 
and represent the best interests of the Kickapoo people. 
These things I will do to the best of my ability, so help me God."
 
 

ARTICLE IX - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. Removal. Each elected or appointed body of the government 
shall have the power to remove any of its members for cause by an 
affirmative vote of a majority of its total membership.

Procedure. The Business Committee shall enact regulations governing 
the procedures to be followed in removing for cause any Tribal official, 
elected or appointed. Such regulations shall provide as a minimum:

(a)  that each person subject to removal shall be voted on 
separately;

(b)  each vacancy resulting from the removal process must be 
filled before proceeding with the removal of any other member of 
that body (to avoid the loss of a quorum);

(c)  any complaint or charge against any Tribal official must first 
be submitted to the Grievance Committee who shall investigate 
and attempt to resolve all disputes informally;

(d)  complaints or charges maybe submitted orally or in writing;

(e)  if the Grievance Committee is unable to resolve the matter 
informally within twenty (20) days, the Grievance Committee shall 
submit a written report of the charges or complaints and its findings 
to each of the members of the body whose member is the subject of 
the complaint or charge; provided: that any complaint or charge 

which has been made orally must be reduced to writing by the 
person making the complaint or accusation before the Grievance 
Committee is obligated to make a report of its findings;

(f)  within seven (7) days after receiving the written report 
of the Grievance Committee, the body affected shall 
determine whether probable cause exists for removal;

(g)  if probable cause exists, the body shall call and conduct 
a special meeting, within twenty (20) days of the expired time in 
(f) above, to consider the removal of the charged member who 
shall be entitled to:

(1)  at least fifteen (15) days written notice of the meeting;

(2)  make a statement in his own defense;

(3)  confront the person or persons accusing him; 
failure of the person making the complaint or 
accusation to be present at the meeting may be 
sufficient grounds for dismissal of the complaint 
or charge.

(h)  if the affected body refuses or fails to take action and the 
time period in subsection (g) has expired, it shall be the duty 
of the Grievance Committee to call and conduct, within twenty 
(20) days of the above mentioned elapsed time, a special 
Grievance Committee meeting to determine whether the 
accused shall be removed or cleared of the charges. The 
person who is the subject of the complaint or charge, shall 
be entitled to the same rights he had in subsection (g) above. 
The Grievance Committee's decision shall be final.

If a member of the Grievance Committee is the subject of 

(i) 
removal, the Business Committee shall assume all duties of 
the Grievance Committee under this Section.

Sec. 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition, pursuant to Article XII 
of this Constitution and Bylaws, it shall be the duty of the Election 
Board to call and conduct, within sixty (60) days, an election for the 
purpose of recall of an elected Tribal official. The election shall be 
conducted pursuant to the Election Ordinance and shall include prohibition 
against any individual again being considered for recall during the 
remainder of his unexpired term. Only one (1) member of that elected 
body shall be considered for recall at any given recall election. This 

shall not prohibit one (1) member from each elected body from being 
considered for recall during a single election. Members of appointive 
bodies are exempt from recall procedures.

Sec. 3. Forfeiture. It shall be the duty of the affected governmental 
body to immediately declare any elective or appointive position within 
its body vacant and to promptly fill such vacancy in the manner provided 
in Article X when it is determined that the encumbent:

(a)  Has resigned.

(b)  Has been convicted, while in office, of a crime involving 
dishonesty in a court of competent jurisdiction.

(c)  Has been convicted of a felony while in a office by a 
court of competent jurisdiction.

(d)  Has falsified his affidavit of qualifications or has 
 omitted information concerning a conviction of a felony 

or any crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude, 
when being certified as a candidate for Tribal office.

(e)  Has been absent, without being excused by the respective 
body, for more than three (3) scheduled meetings in any 
twelve (12) successive months.

(f)  Has ceased to physically reside in the State of Oklahoma.

(g)  Has failed to appear before the Grievance Committee during 
removal procedures conducted pursuant to this Article.
 
 

ARTICLE X - FILLING VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Elective Offices. Vacancies in any elective office shall 
be. promptly filled by the remaining members of the affected body 
appointing a person who qualifies pursuant to Article VI. Such 
appointee shall serve for the remainder of the unexpired term, 
except in the event of a vacancy in the office of Chairman of the 
Business Committee and the Grievance Committee. In that instance, 
the respective Vice-Chairman shall assume the vacated Chairman’s 
position for the remainder of that unexpired term of office. The 
resulting vacancy in the position of Vice-Chairman shall be filled by 
 appointment for the remainder of the unexpired term of that position 
in order to preserve the system of staggered terms of office.

Vacancies on the Business Committee shall not be filled by 
appointment when the number of vacancies on that body results in
 
 

 
 
 there being less than a quorum. In that instance the Election Board 
shall have authority to call and conduct a special election to fill 
vacancies on the Business Committee for the remainder of the 
unexpired terms.

Sec. 2. Appointive Offices. Vacancies in any appointive office shall 
be promptly filled by the body that made the initial appointment except 
as provided in Section 1 of Article VII. Vacancies on the Election 
Board shall be filled pursuant to Article VII, Section 1.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - APPROVAL OF TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 Any Resolution or Ordinance, which by the terms of this Constitution 
and Bylaws is subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior, 
must be received by the local representative of the Secretary no later 
than ten (10) days following its enactment in order to be considered for 

 approval. It shall be the duty of the Secretary's local representative 
to issue acknowledgement of receipt of such enactment within five (5) 
working days of his receipt thereof. If timely filed, that enactment 
shall not become effective until it is approved by the Secretary's 
authorized representative; Provided, that unless such enactment is not 
disapproved within ninety (90) days from the date it is timely received 
by the Secretary's local representative, it shall on the ninety-first (91) 
day automatically become effective.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Initiative. Upon receipt by the Election Board of a valid . 
petition signed by at least fifty (50) members of the Council requesting 
an election on any issue; the Election Board shall call and conduct an 
election within sixty (60) days thereafter at which the qualified voters 
shall approve or disapprove by majority vote, the action in question; 
provided, however, that such approval or disapproval shall be 
effective only in the event that at least twenty (20) percent of all members 
of the Council cast ballots in such election. Provided further, that any 
petition challenging an enactment must be submitted no later than 
sixty (60) days following the date of enactment. Initiative elections shall 
be conducted on a mail out basis as provided in the Election Ordinance 
and shall include provision for returning ballots by mail or in person 
to the Election Board.

The results of such initiative election shall be binding on the Business 
Committee. If the Business Committee's action is sustained, no 

further challenge to that action shall be initiated until one (1) year 
has passed from the date of such election

Sec. 2, Referendum. Upon its receipt of a Business Committee 
Resolution requesting a referendum on any proposal or enactment of 
that body, the Election Board shall call and conduct within thirty (30) 
days thereafter a meeting of the Council to vote by secret ballot 
(majority of those voting) on whether to approve the enactment or 
proposal in question. Such decision shall be binding on the Business 
Committee but shall be subject to initiative in accordance with Section 1.

Sec. 3. Savings Clause. No elections conducted pursuant to this 
Article shall serve to abrogate, modify, or amend any properly 
executed contract or agreement with third parties.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - MEETINGS

 
 All meetings authorized by this Constitution and Bylaws shall be conducted 

pursuant to "Roberts Rules of Order" except as otherwise provided, by 
the terms of this Constitution and Bylaws.

Section 1. Annual meetings of the Kickapoo Council shall be held on 
the second Saturday in June of each year, except as provided in Article VII, 
Section 4, with the time and place being designated by the Business 
Committee which shall announce and have published notices of meetings 
at least ten (10) days prior to the meeting.

Sec. 2, Special meetings of the Kickapoo Council may be called and 
conducted at the discretion of the Chairman, and shall be called and 
conducted by him on the date requested, upon the written request of 
at least three (3) of the Business Committee members, or upon the 
written request of at least twenty-five (25) members of the Tribe, or 
pursuant to a vote of the Council at any meeting; provided, that at least 
ten (10) days notice shall be given in each instance. In the event the 
Chairman does not exercise such responsibility as provided above, any 
three (3) members of the Business Committee shall be empowered to do 
so.

Sec. 3. The principal topic of a special Council meeting must be stated 
in the notice for same and may include the words "and for the transaction 
of other business that may be presented. Unless these words are 
added, no other business can be transacted except those items stated 

 in the notice.

Sec, 4. Regular meetings of the Business Committee shall be held 
quarterly on dates to be established by Resolution of the Business

Committee. The Tribal Secretary shall be responsible for sending 
written notices at least five (5) days in advance to members of the 
Business Committee and the Grievance Committee so that all may 
arrange to attend. While members of the Grievance Committee have no 
vote in the proceedings of Business Committee meetings, their attendance 
is encouraged for the purpose of keeping advised of the Tribe's affairs.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
by the Chairman at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon the
written request of three (3) members of the Business Committee. In 
the absence of such action by the Chairman, any three (3) members
of the Business Committee may proceed to call and conduct the meeting. 
The Tribal Secretary shall give at least three (3) days notice to all
Business Committee members of such meeting.

Sec. 6. Except for executive sessions, all Business Committee meetings 
will be open to all Tribal members. Executive sessions will be held 
only when special circumstances warrant the need, as determined by a 
majority of at least a quorum of the Business Committee. It shall 
be determined by the Business Committee at that time whether the 
Grievance Committee will be invited to attend such session.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - QUORUM

 
 For each of the meetings covered in this Article, no enactment shall 
have any validity in the absence of a quorum.

Section 1. Twenty-five (25) qualified voters of the Tribe shall constitute 
a quorum to do business at any annual or special meetings of the 
Kickapoo Council.

Sec. 2. Three (3) members of the Business Committee shall constitute 
a quorum of the membership thereof.

Sec. 3, Two (2) members of the Grievance Committee and Election Board 
shall constitute a quorum of the membership of those respective bodies.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - TRIBAL LEGISLATION

 
 The Business Committee is the body primarily responsible for legislative 

 functions. However, the Kickapoo Council, by means of initiative, 

referendum, or in meetings of that body, has reserved to itself certain 
legislative authorities. Enactments of the Council shall, in most cases, 
be set forth in Ordinances. The Business Committee, in implementing 
such Ordinances, or in executing its legislative function, shall adopt 
Resolutions.

Resolutions. Recognizing that there are certain actions or expressions 
each governing entity will make which do not specifically constitute 
tribal legislation, they shall be set forth in motions. A motion is an 
expression initiated in a Council meeting by any council member, or in 
meetings of the Business Committee by a member of that body. The forms 
of tribal legislation are defined as follows:

Ordinance - An enactment of the Council in regular or special 
session or at an initiative or referendum election; a separate 
document which shall have long-range effect, such as, establishing 
procedures governing Tribal elections. Except for Tribal 
initiative elections, Ordinances are normally drafted by the Business 
Committee and submitted to the Council for enactment or 
rejection. Ordinances are Tribal laws which shall have general 
application and shall remain in effect until amended or rescinded 
in the same manner in which they were enacted. Such
enactments shall not conflict with this Constitution and Bylaws 
or any subsequent amendments to this governing document.
Every Ordinance shall begin with the words: "Be it enacted 
by the Council of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma."

Resolution - A formal written expression of opinion or will. 
Resolutions are subordinate to, and must be consistent 
with Tribal Ordinances and terms of this Constitution and 
Bylaws. Resolutions shall be used as necessary to set forth 
rules, regulations, and procedures for the purpose of 
implementing the intent of Tribal Ordinances or this 
Constitution and Bylaws. Every Resolution shall contain 
the words: "Now, therefore, be it resolved by the (Business
Committee) or (Council) of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma."

All Tribal Ordinances, Resolutions and minutes shall be recorded in 
special books and shall be open to public inspection.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - JUDICIAL POWERS

 
 To the extent it is not limited by Federal law, the Kickapoo Council 
may exercise its judicial powers through the creation of a Tribal court 
system. The Judicial Branch of Government shall be created through 
an Ordinance drafted by the Business Committee and enacted by the 
Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - INHERENT POWERS

 
 No provision of this Constitution and Bylaws shall be construed as a 
limitation on the inherent sovereign powers of the Kickapoo Tribe of
 
 

 
 
 Oklahoma. Any such powers not specifically limited by Federal law 
are hereby retained by the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - PERSONNEL MERIT

 
 The Business Committee, within six (6) months from the effective 
date of this Constitution and Bylaws shall establish a system for 
employment and promotion of Tribal employees based on merit.
Such system shall include at least: (1) employment and promotion 
in the Tribal Government based on merit; (2) provisions for systematic 
tests and evaluations for appointments and promotions; (3) classification 
and compensation according to duties and responsibilities; (4) just and 
equitable incentives and conditions of employment; (5) continuity of 
employment based on behavior and performance of work; (6) standards 
for dismissal and disciplinary actions shall be publicized and observed.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 Section 1. All Ordinances and Resolutions heretofore enacted by the 
Kickapoo Business Committee shall remain in full force and effect 
to the extent they are not inconsistent with this Constitution and Bylaws.

Sec. 2. The incumbent Business Committee and Grievance Committee 
elected under the original Constitution and Bylaws shall remain in office 
and shall be entitled to exercise all powers granted to them by this 
Constitution and Bylaws until such time as the first election is held 
under this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE XX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Tribe shall enjoy without hindrance, 
freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and
association.

Sec. 2. This Constitution and Bylaws shall not in any way alter, abridge 
or otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of 
this Tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the United States.

Sec. 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Tribe shall 
not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this 
Constitution and Bylaws without the consent of such individual member.
Sec. 4. The protections guaranteed to individual Tribal members by
 
 

 
 
 Title II of the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 77) against 
actions of a Tribe in exercising its powers of self-government, shall
apply to members of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma.
 
 

BYLAWS

ARTICLE XXI - DUTIES OF BUSINESS COMMITTEE OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chairman. The Chairman shall preside at all meetings 
of the council and of the Business Committee. He shall have general 
supervision of the affairs of the Council and of the Business 
Committee and shall perform all duties pertaining to the office of 
Chairman.

 Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, the 

Vice-Chairman shall perform the duties of that office. In case of a 
vacancy in the office of Chairman, the Vice-Chairman shall succeed 
at once to the office of the Chairman until the next regular election 
for the office of Chairman. The resulting vacancy in the office 
of Vice-Chairman shall be filled pursuant to Article X.

Sec. 3. Secretary. The Secretary shall keep an accurate account of 
all proceedings and official records of the Council and of the Business 
Committee. He shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient 
handling of all correspondence pertaining to the business of the Council 
and of the Business Committee. Other than confidential documents, 
records of the Secretary shall be open to inspection by the members 
of the Council in the presence of the Secretary. However, in the event 
the Secretary refuses to do so, an order of the Grievance Committee 
shall require him to make those records available for inspection.
He shall keep a correct list of all members of the Council, shall 
authenticate all accounts or orders of the Council and, in the absence 
of the Chairman and Vice-Chairman shall call meetings to order until 
a Chairman Pro Tem is elected. He shall render a written report at 
the annual Council meeting and, at the expiration of his term of office, 
the records and all papers in his possession shall be turned over to his 
successor. Candidates for this office shall have knowledge of office 
management principals and be able to express himself in writing.

Sec. 4. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all tribal 
funds from any source. He shall keep an accurate record of all such 
funds and shall disburse the same in accordance with the vote of the 
Business Committee. He shall render a written report at the annual 

Council meeting and at such times that he is requested to do so by the 
Business Committee. He shall keep all Tribal moneys entrusted to his 
care in special account(s). At any time that such account(s) shall amount 
to more than fifty (50) dollars, he shall file a bond satisfactory to the 
Business Committee, and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost 
of such bond shall be paid out of Tribal money. At the expiration of his 
term of office, the records and all papers and funds in his possession 
shall be turned over to his successor. Candidates for this office shall 
have a working knowledge of bookkeeping or accounting, principles and 
procedures.

Sec. 5. Councilman. The councilman shall be a full voting member 
of the business Committee and carry out such other duties and 
responsibilities as may be delegated to him by that body.
 
 

ARTICLE XXII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution and Bylaws may be proposed by a 
majority vote of the Business Committee or by a petition signed by 
thirty (30) percent of the adult members of the Tribe, and if approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to a referendum 
vote of the adult members of the Tribe, and shall be effective if 
approved by a majority of the votes cast.
 
 

ARTICLE XXIII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws shall be effective when approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the members 
of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma voting at an election called by the 
Secretary of the Interior under rules and regulations promulgated pursuant 
to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 
(49 Stat. 1967), as amended.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Raymond V. Butler, Commissioner of Indian Affairs,

by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by 

the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), as amended, and delegated to 

me by 230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve the Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma; provided, that nothing in this approval 

shall be construed as authorizing any action under the constitution and 

bylaws that would be contrary to Federal law. Such constitution and 

bylaws shall become effective as provided in Article XXIII of the 

document.

Washington, D. C. 

Date: JUN 6 1977

(Sgd) Raymond V. Butler

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs
 
 

 
CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved June 6, 1977, by the

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the 

attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Kickapoo Tribe of Oklahoma, 

was submitted for ratification to the qualified voters of the tribe and 

was on December 10, 1977, duly ratified by a vote of 33 for, and

5 against, in an election duly called for that purpose.

Date: December 10, 1977

