 
 CONSTITUTION 
of the  
 
LA FOSTA BAND OF MISSION INDIANS 
LA POSTA INDIAN RESERVATION, CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We, the people of the La Posta Band of Mission Indians of California, 
a band of Diegueno Indians, hereinafter referred to as the band, in 
order to establish a formal organization so that the band members may 
help each other, and to improve and develop the La Posta Reservation 
for the benefit of the band, propose this constitution for ratification 
and approval.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the La Posta Band of Mission 
Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the band shall extend to the lands now and hereafter 
comprising the La Posta Indian Reservation, California.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the band shall consist of the following:

(a) The following named individuals who were approved as 

members of the band by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs in a letter dated October 7, 1971:

Grace Cuero Banegas 
Marie Sevella La Chappa 

Cynthia Victoria Sevella 

Gwendolyn Ludwina Sevella

(b) Lineal descendants of one of the individuals named above.

(c) Persons who are adopted by the band in accordance with an 

adopted ordinance approved by the Secretary of the Interior 
or his authorized representative.

Sec. 2. No person shall be a member of the La Posta Band of Mission 
Indians who (a) was a member of any tribe or band of Indians when its 
trust relationship with the Federal Government was terminated, (b) who
 
 

 
 
 has been allotted on another reservation or on the public domain, 
(c) who has relinquished in writing his membership in the La Posta 
Band of Mission Indians, or (d) who is officially, enrolled with or 
is a recognized member of some other tribe or band of Indians,

A "recognized member of some other tribe or band of Indians"means 
any person who, because of affiliation with the other tribe or band, 
has received benefits or has shared in the assets of the tribe or 
band.

Sec. 3, The official membership roll shall be prepared and maintained 
in accordance with an ordinance enacted by the governing body of the 
band, such ordinance to become effective upon approval by the Secretary 
of the Interior or his designated representative. Appeals from the 
inclusion or omission of names on the tribal membership roll shall lie 
to the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the La Posta Band shall be the general 
council which shall be composed of all qualified voters. Officers of 
the general council shall be a chairman and secretary-treasurer, who 
shall perform such duties as may be authorized by the general council. 
The elected officials shall hold office for two (2) years or until 
their successors are duly elected and installed.

Sec. 2, The general council shall meet no less than twice annually on 
dates to be set by the general council. Special meetings may be 
called by the chairman or by written petition of not less than fifty 
percent (50%) of the general council members. Fifty percent (50%) of 
the members of the general council shall constitute a quorum.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 All elections of officers, including the first election, shall be 
conducted under rules and regulations prescribed by the general council. 
Adult members eighteen (18) years of age or older shall qualify as 
voters and, if elected, may hold office.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS

 
 The general council shall have such powers as are authorized by the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), and the

powers and responsibilities hereinafter provided, subject to any limi
tation imposed by the constitution and statutes of the United States. 
Such powers shall include but not be limited to the following:

(a)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 

of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal 
assets without the consent of the band.

(b)  To manage, lease, contract or otherwise deal with 

tribal assets and community resources.

(c)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and 

fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(d)  To enact ordinances consistent with this constitution 

governing future membership, loss of membership and 
the adoption of members.

(e)  To assess fees for the payment of expenses of the band 

or to finance any project which in its opinion is for 
the benefit of the band as a whole.

(f)  To take such actions as are necessary to carry into 

effect any of the foregoing powers.

Any rights and powers not expressly referred to in this article, shall 
not be lost by reason of their omission, but may be exercised through 
the adoption of appropriate bylaws, amendments, ordinances or 
resolutions.
 
 

ARTICLE VII  - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of the 
Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 73) against actions of an Indian 
entity in the exercise of its powers of self-government shall apply 
to the La Posta Band of Mission Indians, its officers and all persons 
within its jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII  - AMENDMENT

 
 Amendments to this constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of 
the general council. They shall be ratified by majority vote in an 
election called for that purpose by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
 
 

 
 
 
 provided at least fity percent (50%) of those entitled to vote shall 
vote in the election.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - RATIFICATION

 
 This constitution when ratified by a majority vote of the adult 
members of the band voting at an election called for that purpose 
by the Secretary of the Interior, wherein at least thirty percent 
(30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote, and when approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior, shall be effective from date of such 
approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs on October 2, 1972, under delegated authority, the attached 

Constitution of the La Posta Band of Mission Indians, La Posta 

Indian Reservation, California, was submitted to the qualified 

voters of the Band and was on January 26, 1373, duly adopted 

by a vote of 2 for and 0 against, in an election in which 

at least thirty percent (30%) of the three (3) persons entitled 

to vote cast their ballots in accordance with the Indian Reorganiza

tion Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act 

of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, William L. Rogers, Deputy Assistant Secretary of the 

Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority 

granted to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, 

do hereby approve the attached Constitution of the La Posta Band of 

Mission Indians, La Posta Indian Reservation, California.

Approval Recommended:

Raymond V. Butler

Acting Director, Office of Community 

Services

(sgd) William L. Rogers

Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C. 

Date: May 3, 1973

