Article VI, Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council, shall be amended as to Sec

tion 1 (d) to read as follows:
 
 

AMENDMENT I

 
 "(d). To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, and tribal assets, which may be authorized or execut
ed by the Secretary of the Interior, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
or any other agency of the Government, provided that no tribal lands 
shall be sold or encumbered, or leased for a period in excess of 10 
years, except that mining leases may he made for such longer periods as 
may bo authorized by law."

Adopted by Secretarial election: April 24, 1943

Approved: June 25, 1943

Effective date: June 25, 1943
 
 

 
 
AMENDMENT II

 
 Article Section 1, Membership, shall be amended to read as follows:

"SECTION 1.—All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the offi
cial census roll of the Lac du Flambeau Reservation as of January 1, 
1936, shall be members of the Tribe: Provided, That the Tribal Council 
shall have power to revise said roll, with the approval of the Secre
tary of the Interior, at any time within twelve years from the appro
val of this Constitution."

Adopted by Secretarial election: April 14, 1945

Approved: June 2, 1945

Effective date: June 2, 1945

Article VIII, Amendments, shall be amended to read as follows:
 
 

AMENDMENT III

 
 "Amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be ratified and ap~ 
proved in the same manner as this Constitution and Byriaws, Whenever 
the Tribal Council by a vote of eight members shall consider an amend 
ment necessary such amendment shall be sent to the Secretary of the 
Interior. It shall then be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior 
to call an election. If at such election the amendment is adopted by 
a majority vote of the adult members of the Tribe residing on the re
servation voting thereon in an election in which at least thirty per
cent of those entitled to vote shall vote, such amendment shall be 
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior and if approved by him 
shall thereupon become effective.’’

Adopted by Secretarial election: April 24, 1943

Approved: June 25 ,  1943

Effective date: June 25, 1943
 
  
  
 

 
 
 Article II, Section 1, shall be amended to read as follows: 
 

AMENDMENT IV

 
 "All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census 
roll of the Lac du Flambeau Reservation as of January 1, 1936, shall 
bo members of the Tribe, Provided, that the Tribal Council shall have 
power to revise said roll, with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, at any time within seventeen years from the approval of 
this Constitution."

Adopted by Secretarial election: October 7, 1952

Approved: January 21, 1953

Effective date: January 21, 1953
 
 

AMENDMENT V

 
 Article VI, Section 1, Sub-section (h) is amended to read:

"To appropriate for tribal use any available applicable tribal funds 
provided that if any appropriation shall result in the total appro
priations for any fiscal year amounting to more than $10,000.00 such 
appropriation shall not be effective until approved by popular re
ferendum."

Adopted by Secretarial election: May 22, 1959

Approved: June 19, 1959

Effective date: June 19, 1959

i

Article VII, Section 9, Purchase of Land by Tribe. Tribal funds may be used to 

acquire land under the following circumstances:
 
 

AMENDMENT VI

 
 (a) Land within or without the Lac du Flambeau Reservation which is not 

now in a trust or restricted Indian ownership may be purchased by 
or for the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, 
either with funds under control of the Tribal Council, or, if the 
Secretary of the Interior consents, with other tribal funds.

(b) Restricted or trust lands, including land in heirship status, may 
be purchased with funds under the control of the Tribal Council, 
or; if the Secretary of the Interior consents; with other tribal 
funds,”

Adopted by Secretarial election: October 3, 1961

Approved: November 13, 1961

Effective date: November 13, 1961
 
  
 

AMENDMENT VII

 
 Article I, TERRITORY, shall be amended in its entirety to read as follows: 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY - JURISDICTION


Section 1. The territory of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin shall be all the land and water within the 
original confines of the Lac du Flambeau Reservation as defined pursuant 
to the Treaty dated September 30, 1854 (10 Stat. 1109), and to such other 
lands and waters that have been added or may hereafter be added thereto 
under law of the United States, except as otherwise provided by Federal 
law.

Sec. 2. The jurisdiction of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin shall extend to all the land and water 
areas within the territory of the band, and further, for the purpose 
of exercising and regulating the exercise of rights to hunt, fish, trap, 
gather wild rice and other usual rights of occupancy, such jurisdiction 
shall extend to all lands and waters described in treaties to which the band 
was a party, which treaties provide for such rights.

Adopted by Secretarial election: June 10, 1974

Approved: August 19, 1974 

Effective date: August 19, 1974
 
 

AMENDMENT VIII

 
 Section 1 of Article VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, 
shall be amended by adding a new subsection to read as follows:

(w)  To adopt resolutions, ordinances and a code, subject to the review 

of the Secretary of the Interior, providing for the licensing, regulation 
and control of non-band members coming upon or being within the 
territory or jurisdiction of the Band, as described in Article I - Territory - 
Jurisdiction of this constitution, for the purpose of recreational 
boating, hunting, fishing, trapping, gathering wild rice or other 
fruits of the earth.

Adopted by Secretarial election: June 10, 1974

Approved: August 19, 1974

Effective date: August 19, 1974
 
 

AMENDMENT IX

 
 Section 1 of Article VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, 
shall be amended by aciding a new subsection to read as follows:

(x)  To adopt resolutions, ordinances and a code, subject to the approval 
by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Band at an election 
called for by the Tribal Council and also subject to review of the 
Secretary of the Interior, providing for the regulation and control 
of Band members who hunt, fish, trap, or gather wild rice upon or 
within the territory or jurisdiction of the Band as described in 
Article I - Territory - Jurisdiction, of this constitution.

Adopted by Secretarial election: June 10, 1974

Approved: August 19, 1974

Effective Date: August 19, 1974
 
 

AMENDMENT X

 
 Section 1 of Article VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, 
shall be amended by adding a new subsection to read as follows:

(y) To authorize the Tribal Council to bring suit in any state or Federal 

Court to enforce any of its tribal enactments.

Adopted by Secretarial election: June 10, 1974

Approved: August 19, 1974

Effective date: August 19, 1974
 
 

AMENDMENT XI

 
 Section 6 of Article IV - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTION shall be amended 
to read as follows:

Sec. 6. Any member of the tribe who is eighteen (18) years 
of age or over and who presents himself at the polls on 
election day shall be entitled to vote.

Adopted by Secretarial election: June 10, 1974

Approved: August. 19, 1974

Effective date: August 19, 1974
 
  
 

AMENDMENT XII

 
 ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP shall be amended in its entirety to read as 

follows: 
 

ARTICLE II MEMBERSHIP


Section 1.  (a) All persons whose names appear on the official

roll of the Lac du Flambeau Band of April 8, 1953, as approved by the 

Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs on November 13, 1964, shall be 

members of the Tribe.

(b) All persons gaining membership subsequent to April 8, 1953, in 

accordance with ARTICLE II of the Constitution and ORDINANCE I - MEMBER

SHIP, approved June 9, 1969, and prior to the effective date of this 

amendment, shall be members of the Tribe.

Section 2.  (a) Any child of one-fourth (1/4) degree or more Lac

du Flambeau Chippewa Indian Blood born to any member of the Tribe shall 

be entitled to membership.

(b) Application for membership shall be submitted by the applicant 

or his parent or guardian to a Committee on Membership, which shall pass 

upon them and present them to the Tribal Council for final action.

Section 3.  Any person enrolled in any other Indian Tribe shall not 

be a member of the Lac du Flambeau Band.

Section 4.  Vested property rights shall not be acquired or lost 

through membership in this organization except as provided herein.

Adopted by Secretarial election: August 24, 1982

Approved: September 10, 1982

Effective date: September 10, 1982

amendment XIII

ARTICLE III - THE GOVERNING BODY, SECTION 4 shall be amended to 

read as follows:

Section 4. No person shall be a candidate for membership on the 

Tribal Council unless he/she shall be an enrolled member of the Lac du 

Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin, at least 

twenty-five (25) years of age, a resident of the reservation for at 

least one year preceding the date of the election and at least one- 

quarter (1/4) degree of Lac du Flambeau Chippewa Indian blood.

Adopted by Secretarial election: August 24, 1982

Approved: September 10, 1982

Effective date: September 10, 1982

amendment XIV

ARTICLE VIII - AMENDMENTS shall be amended in its entirety to read 

as follows:

Amendments to this Constitution and Bylawsmay be ratified and 

approved in the same manner as this Constitution and Bylaws. Whenever 

the Tribal Council by a vote of eight (8) members shall consider an 

amendment necessary such amendment shall be sent to the Secretary of the 

Interior. It shall then be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to 

call an election. If at such election the amendment is adopted by a 

majority vote of the adult members of the Tribe, residing on the reser

vation at least one (1) year prior to the date of the election, votin 

thereon in an election in which at least thirty (30) percent of those 

entitled to vote shall vote, such amendment shall be submitted to the 

Secretary of the Interior and if approved by him shall thereupon become 

effective.

Adopted by Secretarial election: August 24, 1982

Approved: September 10, 1982

Effective date: September 10, 1982
 
 

AMENDMENT XV

 
 ARTICLE VI, POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, SECTION 1 (d) 

shall be amended to read as follows:

(d) To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 

of tribal lands and assets which may be authorized or executed by the 

Secretary of the Interior or any other agency of the Government, PROVIDED 

THAT, no tribal lands shall be sold or encumbered nor shall they be 

leased for a period in excess of twenty-five (25) years, EXCEPT THAT, 

leases may be renewed for up to twenty-five (25) years.

Adopted by Secretarial election: June 22, 1983

Approved: August 2, 1983

Effective date: August 2, 1983

amendment XVI

Article VI, Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council, Section 1(h) 
shall be amended to read as follows:

(h) To appropriate for Tribal use any funds held in trust for 
the Tribe by the United States of America which are available for appro
priation; provided, that if any appropriations for any fiscal year amount
ing to more than $10,000.00 from Tribal trust funds, such appropriation 
shall not be effective until approved by popular referendum.

Adopted by Secretarial election: October 22, 1985

Approved: November 5, 1985

Effective date: November 5, 1985
 
 

AMENDMENT XVII

 
 Article VI, Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council, Section l(s) 

shall be amended to read as follows:

(s) To appropriate for Tribal use and expend general Tribal funds 

in accordance with the budget therefore adopted pursuant to Article IX hereof.

Article IX Tribal General Fund budget shall be added to read as 
follows:

"ARTICLE IX - TRIBAL GENERAL FUND BUDGET"

"Section 1. For purposes of this Article, the Tribal general fund includes 
all funds received by the Tribe, from income of Tribal enterprises, donations, 
unrestricted grants, or other sources which are not held in trust for the 
Tribe by the United States of America, and which are not restricted as to use."

"Section 2. No later than 90 days prior to the end of the current fiscal 
year, the Tribal Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Tribal Council 
a projection of Tribal general fund revenues for the next year and a proposed 
budget for expenditures of such funds. The Tribal Council shall post notice 
and hold a public informational session on proposed budget. The Tribal Council 
shall then set and hold a public hearing on the proposed budget no later than 
60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. No later than 45 days prior to 
the end of the fiscal year the Tribal Council shall adopt a proposed Tribal 
general fund budget and conduct a popular referendum on the budget as a 
whole."

Section 3. If the Tribal general fund budget is approved by a vote of a 
majority of Tribal members voting at the popular referendum, such budget shall 
govern Tribal general fund expenditures for the next fiscal year. If the 
general fund budget is disapproved, the Tribal Council shall hold an additional 
public hearing, adopt a new proposed Tribal general fund budget, and conduct a 
popular referendum on such budget. If this revised budget is disapproved, the 
Tribal Council may, in its discretion, present further proposed budgets for 
referendum or follow the Tribal general fund budget for the preceding year. 
Until a Tribal general fund budget is approved by referendum, expenditure of 
the Tribal general fund shall be made in accordance with the approved budget 
for the preceding year. Such approved budget shall not be increased beyond
fifteen percent (15%)."

"Section 4. The Tribal Council shall appropriate and expend the Tribal general 
fund in accordance with the budget approved by referendum. The Tribal Council 
may, by resolution, increase or decrease expenditures provided that no such 
change shall exceed fifteen per centum (15%) of each approved budget line item 
involved in the change. Any budget modification which results in a 
change of any budget line item in excess of fifteen per centum (15%) shall 
not be effective until approved by popular referendum."

Adopted by Secretarial election: October 22, 1985

Approved: November 5, 1985

Effective date: November 5, 1985 (for FY ’87 budget)

