 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 
LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF LAKE 
 SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS

OF WISCONSIN


 
  
 APPROVED AUGUST 15, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1936

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE LAC du FLAMBEAU BAND OF 
 
 
LAKE SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS OF WISCONSIN

 
 Preamble

We, the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
Indians of Wisconsin, grateful to Almighty God for our freedom, 
in order to secure its blessings, to reestablish our tribal organiza
tion, to conserve and develop our common resources, to establish a 
credit system and to promote the welfare of ourselves and our 
descendants, hereby ordain and establish this Constitution.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin shall extend to the territory within 
the original confines of the Lac du Flambeau Reservation as defined 
pursuant to the treaty dated September 30, 1854 (10 Stat. 1109), 
and to such other lands within or without said boundaries as may 
hereafter be added thereto under any law of the United States, 
except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll of the Lac du Flambeau Reservation as of Jan
uary 1, 1936, shall be members of the Tribe, provided, that the Tribal 
Council shall have power to revise said roll, with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, at any time within two years from the 
approval of this Constitution.

Sec. 2. (a) Any child, of one-fourth (14) or more Indian blood 
born to any member of the Tribe who at the birth of such child 
resided on the reservation shall be entitled to membership.

(b)  Any child of one-half (1/2) or more Indian blood born to any 
member shall be entitled to membership regardless of his parents’ 
residence.

(c)  Any person of Indian blood who is a descendant of any mem
ber may be admitted to membership by a majority vote of the Tribal 
Council.

(d)  Any person of Indian blood married to a member may be 
admitted to membership by a three-fourths (3/4) vote of the Tribal 
Council.

(e)  Any person adopted into membership must be a permanent 
resident of the reservation and not a member of any other Indian 
tribe.

(f)  Applications for membership shall be submitted by the appli
cant or his parent or guardian to a Committee on Membership, which

shall pass upon them and present them to the Tribal Council for final 
action.

Sec. 3. Vested property rights shall not be acquired or lost through 

membership in this organization except as provided herein.

Article III—The Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Lac du Flambeau Band of 
Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin shall be the Tribal 
Council.

Sec. 2. The Council shall consist of a President, Vice President, 
Secretary, Treasurer, and eight, (8) additional members. The officers 
and Councilmen shall be nominated and elected by popular vote as 
provided in Article IV of this Constitution.

Sec. 3. The President, Vice-president, Secretary, and Treasurer 
shall act as the Executive Council of the Tribal Council, to which the 
Tribal Council may delegate such administrative power as it shall 
see fit.

Sec. 4. No person shall be a candidate for membership on the 
Tribal Council unless he shall be an enrolled member of the Lac du 
Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin, 
at least twenty-five (25) years of age, and a resident of the reserva
tion for at least one year preceding the date of election.

Article IV—Nominations and Election

Section 1. The first election of a Tribal Council of twelve mem
bers under this Constitution shall be called and supervised by the 
Constitution Committee as now constituted, within thirty (30) days 
after the ratification of this Constitution and Bylaws, and thereafter 
elections of six Councilmen shall be held every year on the first 
Tuesday in October.

Sec. 2. Immediately after the first election the Council shall meet 
and choose by lot two officers and four councilmen who shall serve 
until the next annual election, the remaining officers and councilmen 
to serve until the second annual election. After the first election, 
officers and councilmen shall be elected for two years and serve until 
their successors are elected and qualified.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council shall determine rules and regulations 
governing all elections following the State of Wisconsin procedure 
as far as practicable.

Sec. 4. Any qualified member of the Tribe may become a candidate 
for membership in the Council by notifying the Secretary of the 
Tribal Council in writing of his candidacy at least fifteen days prior 
to the election. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Tribal 
Council to post at least ten days before the election, the names of all 
candidates for the Council.

Sec. 5. The Tribal Council, or a board appointed by the Council, 
shall certify to the election of the members of the Council imme
diately after the election returns.

Sec. 6. Any member of the Tribe who is twenty-one (21) years of 
age or over and who presents himself at the polls on election day, 
shall be entitled to vote.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a Councilman or official shall die, resign, perma
nently leave the reservation, or to be removed from office, the Council 
shall declare the position vacant and appoint a successor to fill the 
unexpired term, provided that the person chosen to fill such vacancy 
shall be qualified.

Sec. 2. Members of the Tribal Council or other elected officials of 
this organization may be removed from office for improper conduct 
or gross neglect of duty upon petition signed by twenty-five or more 
members of the organization, stating their reasons for such removal. 
The Tribal Council shall consider such complaint and if deemed suffi
cient for removal, the Council shall appoint an impartial committee 
composed of five members of the Tribe, none of whom shall be a 
member of the Council or one of the signers of the petition, who 
shall immediately proceed to investigate and report to the Council. 
The Tribal Council, shall, upon receipt of such report, grant a hear
ing, hear testimony and determine the action to be taken, and if 
such investigation shall merit removal, it shall be ordered by a 
majority vote of the Council. And it is further provided that such 
removed official shall have the right of appeal to the whole Tribe 
at an annual or special election.

Article VI—Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall have the power, subject to any 
limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States, and subject to all express restrictions upon such powers con
tained in this Constitution and Bylaws:

(a)  To regulate the use and disposition of tribal property to pro
tect and preserve the tribal property, wild life and natural resources 
of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, 
to cultivate Indian arts, crafts, and culture, to administer charity, 
to protect the health, security, and general welfare of the Tribe.

(b)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chip
pewa Indians and its members, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, 
on behalf of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa 
Indians and to advise and consult with the representatives of the 
Department of the Government of the United States on all matters 
affecting the affairs of the Tribe.

(d)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, and tribal assets, which may be authorized or exe
cuted by the Secretary of the Interior, the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, or any other agency of the Government, provided that no 
tribal lands shall be sold or encumbered, or leased for a period in 
excess of five years, except that mining leases may be made for such 
longer periods as may be authorized by law.

(e)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior with regard to 
all appropriation estimates, or Federal projects, for the benefit of 
the Tribe, prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau 
of the Budget and to Congress.

(f)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Tribe 
in accordance with the terms of a charter to be issued by the Secre
tary of the Interior.

(g)  To make assignments of tribal lands to members of the Tribe 

in conformity with Article VII of this Constitution.

(h)  To appropriate for tribal use any available applicable tribal 
funds provided that if any appropriation shall result in the total 
appropriations for any fiscal year amounting to more than $5,000, 
such appropriation shall not be effective until approved by popular 
referendum.

(i)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior, which provide for taxes, assessments, 
or license fees upon non-members doing business within the reserva
tion, or obtaining special rights or privileges, and the same, without 
such review, may also be applied to members of the Tribe, provided 
such ordinances have been approved by a popular referendum of 
the Tribe.

(j)  To exclude from the restricted lands of the reservation per
sons not legally entitled to reside thereon, under ordinances which 
shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(k)  To enact resolutions or ordinances in accordance with Article 
II of this Constitution governing adoptions and abandonment of 
membership, provided that such adoption shall require the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior for each applicant unless he is a 
person of Indian descent and related by marriage or descent to a 
member of the Tribe.

(1)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members or the Tribe and providing for the maintenance of law 
and order and the administration of justice by the establishment of 
an Indian Court, and defining its powers and duties.

(m)  To purchase land from members of the Tribe for public pur
poses under condemnation proceedings in courts of competent 
jurisdiction.

(n)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances which are intended 
to safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and general 
welfare of the Tribe by regulating the conduct of trade and the use 
and disposition of property upon the reservation, providing that 
any ordinance directly affecting non-members shall be subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(o)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to regulate the activities of all cooperative and other associations 
which may be organized under any charter issued under this Con
stitution.

(p)  To regulate the inheritance of real and personal property, 
other than allotted lands, within the Lac du Flambeau Reservation, 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(q)  To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe.
(r)  To recommend and provide for the appointment of guardians 
for orphans, minor members of the Tribe, and mental incompetents, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of. the Interior, and to ad
minister tribal and other funds or property which may be trans
ferred or entrusted to the Tribe or Tribal Council for this purpose.

(s)  To create and maintain a tribal fund by accepting grants or 
donations from any person, State, or the United States, or by tribal 
enterprises.

(t)  To delegate to subordinate boards or to cooperative associa
tions which are open to all members of the Tribe, any of the fore
going powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by vir
tue of such delegated power.

(u)  To adopt resolutions or ordinances to effectuate any of the 

foregoing powers.

(v)  To pledge tribal assets, except tribal lands, as collateral to 
secure loans but only with the approval of a referendum vote of 
the members of the Tribe and with the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior.

Sec. 2. Any resolution or ordinance, which, by the terms of this 
Constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
shall be presented to the Superintendent of the reservation, who 
shall, within ten days thereafter, approve or disapprove the same, 
and if such ordinance or resolution is approved, it shall thereupon 
become effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of 
the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of enactment, 
rescind said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying the 
Council of such action: Provided, that if the Superintendent shall 
refuse to approve any resolution or ordinance submitted to him, 
within ten days after its enactment, he shall advise the Council 
of his reasons therefor, and the Council, if such reasons appear to 
be insufficient, may refer it to the Secretary of the Interior, who 
may pass upon same and either approve or disapprove it within 
ninety (90) days from its enactment.

Sec. 3. The Council of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Supe
rior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin may exercise such further 
powers as may in the future be delegated to it by the Federal Gov
ernment, either through order of the Secretary of the Interior or by 
Congress, or by the State Government or by members of the Tribe.
Sec. 4. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Lac du 
Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin 
but not expressly referred to in this Constitution shall not be 
abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the members of 
the Tribe through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and 
constitutional amendments.

Article VII—Land

Section 1. Allotted Lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands, within the Lac du Flambeau Reservation shall continue to be 
held as heretofore by their present owners. It is recognized that 
under existing law such lands may be condemned for public pur
poses, such as roads, public buildings, or other public improvements, 
upon payment of adequate compensation, by any agency of the Fed
eral Government, or by the Tribe itself. It is further recognized 
that under existing law such lands may be inherited by the heirs 
of the present owner, whether or not they are members of the Lac 
du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wiscon

sin. Likewise, it is recognized that under existing law the Secretary 
of the Interior may, in his discretion, remove restrictions upon such 
land, upon application by the Indian owners, whereupon the land 
will become subject to State taxes and may then be mortgaged or 
sold. The right of the individual Indian to hold or to part with 
his land, as under existing law, shall not be abrogated by anything 
contained in this Constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, 
with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily con
vey his land to the Tribe either in exchange for a money payment 
or in exchange for an assignment covering the same land or other 
land, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 2. Tribal Lands.—The unallotted lands of the Lac du Flam
beau Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by 
the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of 
Wisconsin or by the United States in trust for the said Tribe shall 
be held as tribal lands, and no part of such land shall be mortgaged 
or sold. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to individual Indians, 
but may be assigned to members of the Tribe, or leased, or otherwise 
used by the Tribe, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 3. Leasing of Tribal Lands.—Tribal lands may be leased by 
the Tribal Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, for such periods of time as are permitted by law.

In the leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given, first, to 
cooperative associations of members of the Tribe, and, secondly, to 
individual Indians who are members of the Tribe. No lease of 
tribal lands to a non-member shall be made by the Tribal Council 
unless it shall appear that no cooperative association of members 
of the Tribe or individual member of the Tribe is able and 'willing 
to use the land and to pay a reasonable fee for such use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the Tribal 
Council in conformity with Departmental Regulations for the pro
tection of Indian range and timber resources authorized by Section 6 
of the Act of June 18, 1934.

Sec. 4. Grant of “Standard” Assignments.—In any assignment of 
tribal lands which are now owned by the Tribe or which may be 
acquired hereafter for the Tribe by the United States or purchased 
by the Tribe out of tribal funds, preference shall be given, first, to 
heads of families which are entirely landless, and secondly, to heads 
of families which have no allotted lands, or interests in allotted 
lands, but shall have already received assignments consisting of less 
than an economic unit of agricultural land, or other land or interests 
in land of equal value, such economic unit to be determined from time 
to time by the Tribal Council.

No allotted member of the Tribe who may hereafter have the re
strictions upon his land removed and whose land may hereafter be 
alienated, except to the Tribe, shall be entitled to receive an assign
ment of land as a landless Indian.

The Tribal Council, may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of not to ex
ceed five dollars ($5.00) on approval of an assignment made under 
this section.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary pur
pose of establishing homes for landless members and shall be known 
as “standard” assignments.

Sec. 5. Tenure of Standard” Assignments.—If any member of 
the Tribe holding a “standard” assignment of land shall, for a 
period of one year fail to use the land so assigned or shall use 
such land for any unlawful purpose such assignment may be can
celled by the Tribal Council after due notice and an opportunity to 
be heard, and the said land may be reassigned in accordance with 
the provisions of Section 4 of this article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a “standard” assignment, 
his heirs or other individuals designated by him, by will or written 
request shall have a preference in the reassignment of the land, pro
vided such persons are members of the Tribe who would be eligible 
to receive a “standard” assignment.

Sec. 6. Grant of "Exchange” Assignments.—Any member of the 
Tribe who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land may 
voluntarily convey his interest in such land to the Tribe in exchange 
for an assignment to the same land or other land of equal value. 
If the assignee prefers, he may receive, in lieu of a specific tract 
of land, a proportionate share in a larger unit of land or other 
interest.

Assignments under this section shall be known as “exchange” 

assignments.

Sec. 7. Inheritance of Improvements.—Improvements of any char
acter made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and inherited 
by members of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chip
pewa Indians of Wisconsin or otherwise disposed of under such reg
ulations as the Tribal Council shall provide. No permanent improve
ments shall be removed from the land without the consent of the 
Tribal Council.

Sec. 8. Exchange of Assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake 
Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin by common consent in 
such a manner as the Tribal Council shall designate.

Sec. 9. Purchase of Land bp Tribe.—Tribal funds may be used 
with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire land, 
under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within or without the Lac du Flambeau Reservation 
which is not now in Indian ownership may be purchased by or for 
the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians.

(b)  Restricted land, which is in heirship status at the time of the 
adoption and approval of this Constitution, may be purchased by 
or for the Tribe, with the consent of all the adult heirs, and the legal 
guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as may be 
agreed upon.

Sec. 10. Method of Making Assignments.—Applications for as
signments shall be filed with the Secretary of the Council, and shall 
be in writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons apply
ing for the land and as accurate a description of the land desired as 
the circumstances shall permit.

Notices of all applications received by the Secretary shall be posted 
by him in the Agency office and in at least three other conspicuous 
places in the district in which the land is located for not less than 
twenty (20) days before action is taken by the Council. Any mem
ber of the Tribe wishing to oppose the granting of an assignment 

shall do so in writing, setting forth his objections, to be filed with 
the Secretary of the Council, and may if he so desires appear before 
the Council to present evidence. The Secretary of the Council shall 
furnish the Superintendent or other officers in charge of the Agency 
a complete record of all action taken by the Council on applications 
for assignment of land, and a complete record of assignments shall 
be kept in the Agency office and shall be open for inspection by mem
bers of the Tribe.

The Council shall draw up one or more forms for “standard” and 
“exchange” assignments, which shall be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

Article VIII—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and Bylaws may be ratified and 
approved in the same manner as this Constitution and Bylaws. 
Whenever the Tribal Council by a vote of eight members shall con
sider an amendment necessary such amendment shall be sent to the 
Secretary of the Interior. It shall then be the duty of the Secretary 
of the Interior to call an election. If at such election the amendment 
is adopted by a majority vote of the adult members of the Tribe 
voting thereon in an election in which at least thirty per cent of those- 
entitled to vote shall vote, such amendment shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior and if approved by him shall thereupon 
become effective.

BYLAWS OF THE LAC du FLAMBEAU BAND OF LAKE SUPERIOR 
 
 
CHIPPEWA INDIANS OF WISCONSIN

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The President of the Tribal Council shall preside at all 
meetings of the Council. He shall at all times have general super
vision of the affairs of the Tribal Council and such matters as nat
urally pertain to the general welfare of the Community. It shall also 
be the duty of the President to countersign all checks drawn against 
funds of the Tribe by the Treasurer. He shall vote only in case of a 
tie. The President shall be ex-officio member of all subordinate 
boards and committees.

Sec. 2. In the absence of the President, the Vice President shall 
preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council and shall act in his 
stead in all matters pertaining to the office of the President.

Sec. 3. The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceed
ings of the Tribal Council and furnish copies thereof to the Super
intendent of the jurisdiction. He shall attend to the keeping of the 
official records of the Tribal Council and shall be responsible for the 
prompt and efficient handling of all correspondence pertaining to 
the business of the Tribal Council. All official records of the Tribal 
Secretary shall be open to inspection by the members of the Tribe at 
all times. The Secretary shall be ex-officio member of all subordi
nate boards and committees.

Sec. 4. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in pos
session of the Tribe from any source. He shall be bonded by a 
surety company of recognized standing in an amount to be deter
mined by the Tribal Council, such surety company and bond to be 
approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He shall keep 
an accurate record of all such funds and shall disburse the same in 
accordance with the vote of the Tribal Council and as designated by 
this Constitution and Bylaws. The books shall be open to audit 
and examination by the duly authorized officers of the Secretary of 
the Interior at all times.

The records of the Treasurer shall be open to inspection by mem
bers of the Tribe, members of the Tribal Council and its officers.
Sec. 5. The subordinate officers, boards, and committees of the 
Tribal Council shall perform such duties as the Tribal Council shall, 
by resolution, from time to time provide.

Article II—Oath

All officers when elected shall be duly installed and subscribe to 
an oath of office to support the Constitution of the United States 
and this Constitution. Such officers may be sworn in by any officer 
qualified to administer an oath.

Article III—Meetings

Section 1. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held on 
the first Friday of January, April, July, and October and at such 
other times as the Council shall designate. Special meetings shall 
be held at the discretion of the President, or upon request of three

members of the Tribal Council. Five days written notice shall be 
given to all Council members.

Sec. 2. Seven members shall constitute a quorum.
Sec. 3. The Tribal Council shall prescribe such rules of order for 

its meetings as it desires.

Sec. 4. The meetings of the Tribal Council except executive ses

sions shall be public to the Tribe.

Article IV—Adoption of Constitution and Bylaws

This Constitution and Bylaws, when ratified by a majority vote 
of the adult members of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Su
perior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin voting at a special election 
called for the purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided 
that at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote shall vote 
in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, 
and, if approved, shall be effective from the date of approval.

Certification of Ratification

Pursuant to an order, approved June 11, 1936, by the Secretary of 
the Interior, the attached Constitution and Bylaws were submitted 
for ratification to the adult members of the Lac du Flambeau Band 
of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of the Lac du Flambeau Res
ervation in Wisconsin, and were on July 18, 1936, duly adopted by 
a vote of 182, for, and 51 against, in an election in which over 30 
percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with 
section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, (48 
Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935, (49 Stat. 378).

Ben Chosa,
Chairman of Election Board.

Charles Sunn, 

Secretary of Election Board.

J. C. Cavill, Superintendent.
I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act 
of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Lac du Flambeau Band of 
Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
and Bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to the adult members 
of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians 
of Wisconsin.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 
to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and Bylaws.

Approval recommended: August 5, 1936.

William Zimmerman, Jr.

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., August 15, 1936.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.

[seal]
 
 

 
 
 