 
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE LAC DU FLAMBEAU 
 
BAND OF LAKE SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS OF
WISCONSIN

PREAMBLE


We, the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin, 
grateful to Almighty God for our freedom, in order to secure its blessings, to re-establish our 
tribal organization, to conserve and develop our common resources, to establish a credit 
system and to promote the welfare of ourselves and our descendants, hereby ordain and 
establish this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY - JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. 

The territory of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Indians of Wisconsin shall be all the land and water within the original confines of the Lac 
du Flambeau Reservation as defined pursuant to the Treaty dated September 30, 1854 (10 
Stat. 1109), and to such other lands and waters that have been added or may hereafter be 
added thereto under law of the United States, except as otherwise provided by Federal law.

Section 2. The jurisdiction of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin shall extend to all the land and water areas within the 
territory of the Band, and further, for the purpose of exercising and regulating the exercise 
of rights to hunt, fish, trap, gather wild rice and other usual rights of occupancy, such 
jurisdiction shall extend to all lands and waters described in treaties to which the Band was 
a party, which treaties provide for such rights.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. 

(a) All persons whose names appear on the official roll of the Lac
du Flambeau Band of April 8, 1953, as approved by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs on November 13, 1964, shall be members of the Tribe.

(b) All persons gaining membership subsequent to April 8, 1953, in accordance 
with ARTICLE II of the Constitution, as amended on September 10, 1982, and the June 9, 
1969 Membership Ordinance shall be members of the Tribe.

Section 2. 

(a) Any child of one-fourth (1/4) degree or more Lac du Flambeau
Chippewa Indian Blood born to any member of the Tribe shall be entitled to membership.

(b) Application for membership shall be submitted by the applicant or his parent 
or guardian to a Committee on Membership, which shall pass upon them and present them 
to the Tribal Council for final action.

Section 3. 

Any person enrolled in any other Indian Tribe shall not be a member 

of the Lac du Flambeau Band.

Section 4. 

Any lineal descendent of a member of the Lac du Flambeau Band may
be adopted as a member by the Tribal Council, provided that such person shall possess one
fourth (1/4) degree or more of Lake Superior Chippewa blood.

Section 5. 

Vested property rights shall not be acquired or lost through 

membership in this organization except as provided herein.
 
 

ARTICLE III - THE GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. 

The governing body of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 

Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin shall be the Tribal Council.

Section 2. 

The Council shall consist of a President, Vice-President, Secretary, 
Treasurer, and eight (8) additional members. The officers and councilmen shall be 
nominated and elected by popular vote as provided in Article IV of this Constitution.

Section 3. 

The President, Vice-President, Secretary, and Treasurer shall act as 
the Executive Council of the Tribal Council, to which the Tribal Council may delegate such 
administrative power as it shall see fit.

Section 4. No person shall be a candidate for membership on the Tribal Council 
unless he/she shall be an enrolled member of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 
Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin, at least twenty-five (25) years of age, a resident of the 
reservation for at least one year preceding the date of the election and at least one-quarter 
(1/4) degree of Lac du Flambeau Chippewa Indian blood.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - NOMINATIONS AND ELECTION

 
 Section 1. 

The first election of a Tribal Council of twelve members under this 
Constitution shall be called and supervised by the Constitution Committee as now 
constituted, within thirty (30) days after the ratification of this Constitution and Bylaws, and 
thereafter elections of six (6) councilmen shall be held every year on the first Tuesday in 
October.

Section 2. 

Immediately after the first election the Council shall meet and choose
by lot two officers and four councilmen who shall serve until the next annual election, the 
remaining officers and councilmen to serve until the second annual election. After the first 
election, officers and councilmen shall be elected for two years and serve until their 
successors are elected and qualified.

Section 3. 

The Tribal Council shall determine rules and regulations governing 

all elections following the State of Wisconsin procedure as far as practicable.

Section 4. 

Any qualified member of the Tribe may become a candidate for 
membership in the Council by notifying the Secretary of the Tribal Council in writing of his 
candidacy at least fifteen days prior to the election. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of 
the Tribal Council to post at least ten (10) days before the election, the names of all 
candidates for the council.

Section 5. 

The Tribal Council, or a board appointed by the Council, shall certify

to the election of the members of the Council immediately after the election returns.

Section 6. 

Any member of the Tribe who is eighteen (18) years of age or over and

who presents himself at the polls on election day shall be entitled to vote.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 1. If a councilman or official shall die, resign, permanently leave the 
reservation, or to be removed from office, the Council shall declare the position vacant and 
appoint a successor to fill the unexpired term, PROVIDED, that the person chosen to fill 
such vacancy shall be qualified.

Section 2. Members of the Tribal Council or other elected officials of this 
organization may be removed from office for improper conduct or gross neglect of duty upon 
petition signed by twenty-five (25) or more members of the organization, stating their 
reasons for such removal. The Tribal Council shall consider such complaint and if deemed 
sufficient for removal, the Council shall appoint an impartial committee composed of five 
(5) members of the Tribe, none of whom shall be a member of the Council or one of the 
signers of the petition, who shall immediately proceed to investigate and report to the 
Council. The Tribal Council, shall, upon receipt of such report, grant a hearing, hear 
testimony and determine the action to be taken, and if such investigation shall merit removal, 
it shall be ordered by a majority vote of the Council. And it is further provided that such 
removed official shall have the right of appeal to the whole Tribe at an annual or special 
election.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Tribal Council shall have the power, subject to any limitations 
imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United States, and subject to all express 
restrictions upon such powers contained in this Constitution and Bylaws:

(a) 

To regulate the use and disposition of tribal property to protect and preserve 
the tribal property, wild life and natural resources of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake 
Superior Chippewa Indians, to cultivate Indian arts, crafts, and culture, to administer charity, 
to protect the health, security, and general welfare of the Tribe.

(b) 

To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement of the rights of 

the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians and its members.

Amendment approved by Secretarial Election on June 11, 2002, approved by the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs on July 22, 2002, Effective date: July 22, 2002.

(c) 

To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, on behalf of the 
Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians and to advise and consult with 
the representatives of the Department of the Government of the United States on all matters 
affecting the affairs of the Tribe.

(d) 

To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands 
and assets which may be authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior or any other 
agency of the Government, PROVIDED THAT, no tribal lands shall be sold or encumbered 
nor shall they be leased for a period in excess of twenty-five (25) years, EXCEPT THAT, 
leases may be renewed for up to twenty-five (25) years.

(e) 

To advise with the Secretary of the Interior, with regard to all appropriation 
estimates, or Federal projects, for the benefit of the Tribe, prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(f) 

To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Tribe in accordance 

with the terms of a charter to be issued by the Secretary of the Interior.

(g) 

To make assignments of tribal lands to members of the Tribe in conformity 

with Article VII of this Constitution.

(h) 

To appropriate for Tribal use any funds held in trust for the Tribe by the 
United States of America which are available for appropriation; provided, that if any 
appropriations for any fiscal year amounting to more than $10,000.00 from Tribal trust funds, 
such appropriation shall not be effective until approved by popular referendum.

(i) 

To promulgate legislation, statutes, codes and ordinances, which provide for 
taxes, assessments, or license fees, or obtaining special rights or privileges, and the same, 
PROVIDED, such legislative enactments governing the activity of all persons within the 
Reservation boundaries have been approved by a popular referendum of the Tribe delegating 
enforcement of these legislative actions to the Tribal Council. Amendment adopted by 
Secretarial Election on June 11, 2002, approved by Bureau of Indian Affairs on July 22, 
2002, effective date July 22, 2002.

(j) 

To exclude from the restricted lands of the reservation persons not legally 
entitled to reside thereon, under ordinances which shall be subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior.

(k) 

To enact resolutions or ordinances in accordance with Article II of this 
Constitution governing adoptions and abandonment of membership, PROVIDED, that such 
adoption shall require the approval of the Secretary of the Interior for each applicant unless 
he is a person of Indian descent and related by marriage or descent to a member of the Tribe.

(l) 

To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of members of the Tribe and providing for 
maintenance of law and order and the administration of justice by the establishment of an 
Indian court, and defining its powers and duties.

(m) 

To promulgate legislation, statutes, codes and ordinances, to purchase land 
for the Tribe for public purpose under condemnation proceedings delegating such power of 
condemnation to the Tribal Council; PROVIDED, that each decision to purchase land under 
condemnation proceedings shall be based on a public purpose and shall be necessary to 
protect the political integrity, economic security, or health and welfare of the Tribe; and 
FURTHER PROVIDED, that allotted lands shall not be available for purchase under this 
section. Amendment adopted by Secretarial Election on June 11, 2002, approved by Bureau 
of Indian Affairs on July 22, 2002, effective date July 22, 2002.

(n) 

To promulgate legislation, statutes, codes and ordinances, intended to 
safeguard and promote peace, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the Tribe by 
regulating the conduct of trade and the use and disposition of property within the territory 
of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, as defined in Article I - 
Territory-Jurisdiction, including the conduct, the use, and the creation of a land and title 
office, and the conveyance of property upon the Reservation, delegating the enforcement of 
these legislative actions to the Tribal Council. Amendment adopted by Secretarial Election 
on June 11, 2002, approved by Bureau of Indian Affairs on July 22, 2002, effective date July 
22, 2002.

(o) 

To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes and to regulate 
the activities of all cooperative and other associations which may be organized under any 
charter issued under this Constitution.

(p) 

To regulate the inheritance of real and personal property, other than allotted 
lands, within the Lac du Flambeau Reservation, subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(q) 

To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe.

(r) 

To recommend and provide for the appointment of guardians for orphans, 
minor members of the Tribe, and mental incompetents, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, and to administer tribal and other funds or property which may be 
transferred or entrusted to the Tribe or Tribal Council for this purpose.

(s) 

To appropriate for Tribal use and expend general Tribal funds in accordance 

with the budget therefore adopted pursuant to Article IX hereof.

(t) 

To delegate to subordinate boards or to cooperative associations which are 
open to all members of the Tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review 
any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.

(u) 

To adopt resolutions or ordinances to effectuate any of the foregoing powers.

(v) 

To pledge tribal assets, except tribal lands, as collateral to secure loans but
only with the approval of a referendum vote of the members of the Tribe and with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(w) 

To adopt resolutions, ordinances and a code, subject to the review of the 
Secretary of the Interior, providing for the licensing, regulation and control of non-band 
members coming upon or being within the territory or jurisdiction of the Band, as described 
in Article I - Territory - Jurisdiction of this Constitution, for the purpose of recreational 
boating, hunting, fishing, trapping, gathering wild rice or other fruits of the earth.

(x) 

To adopt resolutions, ordinances and a code, subject to the approval by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Band at an election called for by the Tribal 
Council and also subject to review of the Secretary of the Interior, providing, for the 
regulation and control of Band members who hunt, fish, trap, or gather wild rice upon or 
within the territory or jurisdiction of the Band as described in Article I - Territory - 
Jurisdiction, of this Constitution.

(y) To authorize the Tribal Council to bring suit in any State or Federal court to 

enforce any of its enactments.

Section 2. Any resolution or ordinance, which by the terms of this Constitution, 
is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent 
of the Reservation, who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or disapprove the 
same, and if such ordinance or resolution is approved, it shall thereupon become effective, 
but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the 
Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of enactment, 
rescind said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying the council of such action: 
PROVIDED, that if the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or ordinance 
submitted to him, within ten (10) days after its enactment, he shall advise the council of his 
reasons therefore, and the council, if such reasons appear to be insufficient, may refer it to 
the Secretary of the Interior, who may pass upon same and either approve or disapprove it 
within (90) days from its enactment.

Section 3. 

The Council of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa
Indians of Wisconsin may exercise such further powers as may in the future be delegated to 
it by the Federal Government, either through order of the Secretary of the Interior or by 
Congress, or by the State Government or by members of the Tribe.

Section 4. 

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Lac du Flambeau Band
of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin but not expressly referred to in this 
Constitution shall not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the members of 
the Tribe through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - LAND

 
 Section 1. 

Allotted Lands. 

Allotted lands, including heirship lands, within
the Lac du Flambeau Reservation shall continue to be held as heretofore by their present 
owners. It is recognized that under such existing law such lands may be condemned for 
public purposes, such as roads, public building, or other public improvements, upon payment 
of adequate compensation, by any agency of the Federal Government, or by the Tribe itself. 
It is further recognized that under existing law such lands may be inherited by the heirs of 
the present owner, whether or not they are members of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake 
Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin. Likewise, it is recognized that under existing law 
the Secretary of the Interior may, in his discretion, remove restrictions upon such land, upon 
application by the Indian owners, whereupon the land will become subject to State taxes and 
may then be mortgaged or sold. The right of the individual Indian to hold or to part with his 
land, as under existing law, shall not be abrogated by anything contained in this Constitution, 
but the owner of restricted land may, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
voluntarily convey his land to the Tribe either in exchange for a money payment or in 
exchange for an assignment covering the same land or other land, as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. 

Tribal Lands. The unallotted lands of the Lac du Flambeau 
Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the Lac du Flambeau Band 
of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin or by the United States in trust for the said 
Tribe shall be held as tribal lands, and no part of such land shall be mortgaged or sold. Tribal 
lands shall not be allotted to individual Indians, but may be assigned to members of the 
Tribe, or leased, or otherwise used by the Tribe, as hereinafter provided.

Section 3. 

Tribal lands may be leased by the Tribal
Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, for such periods of time as are 
permitted by law.

Leasing of Tribal Lands. 

In the leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given, first, to cooperative 
associations of members of the Tribe, and, secondly, to individual Indians who are members 
of the Tribe. No lease of tribal lands to a non-member shall be made by the Tribal Council 
unless it shall appear that no cooperative association of members of the Tribe or individual 
member of the Tribe is able and willing to use the land and to pay a reasonable fee for such 
use.

Grazing permits covering tribal lands may be issued by the Tribal Council in 
conformity with Departmental Regulations for the protection of Indian range and timber 
resources authorized by Section 6 of the Act of June 18, 1934.

Section 4. 

Grant of "Standard" Assignments. 

In any assignment of tribal lands
which are now owned by the Tribe or which may be acquired hereafter for the Tribe by the 
United States or purchased by the Tribe out of tribal funds, preference shall be given, first, 
to heads of families which are entirely landless, and secondly, to heads of families which 
have no allotted lands, or interests in allotted lands, but shall have already received 

assignments consisting of less than an economic unit of agricultural land, or other land or 
interests in land of equal value, such economic unit to be determined from time to time by 
the Tribal Council.

No allotted member of the Tribe who may hereafter have the restrictions upon his 
land removed and whose land may hereafter be alienated, except to the Tribe, shall be 
entitled to receive an assignment of land as a landless Indian.

The Tribal Council, may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of not to exceed five dollars ($5) 

on approval of an assignment made under this section.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary purpose of establishing 

homes for landless members and shall be known as "standard" assignments.

Section 5. 

Tenure of "Standard" Assignments. If any member of the Tribe 
holding a "standard" assignment of land shall, for a period of one year fail to use the land so 
assigned or shall use such land for any unlawful purpose such assignment may be canceled 
by the Tribal Council after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, and the said land may 
be reassigned in accordance with provisions of Section 4 of this Article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a "standard" assignment, his heirs or other 
individuals designated by him, by will or written request shall have a preference in the 
reassignment of the land, provided such persons are members of the Tribe who would be 
eligible to receive a "standard" assignment.

Section 6. 

Grant of "Exchange" Assignments. Any members of the Tribe who
owns an allotment or any share or heirship land may voluntarily convey his interest in such 
land to the Tribe in exchange for an assignment to the same land or other land of equal value. 
If the assignee prefers, he may receive, in lieu of a specific tract of land, a proportionate share 
in a larger unit of land or other interest.

Assignments under this section shall be known as "exchange" assignments.

Section 7. 

Inheritance of Improvements. 

Improvements of any character
made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and inherited by members of the Lac du 
Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin or otherwise disposed of 
under such regulations as the Tribal Council shall provide. No permanent improvements 
shall be removed from the land without the consent of the Tribal Council.

Section 8. 

Assignments may be exchanged between
members of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin by 
common consent in such a manner as the Tribal Council shall designate.

Exchange of Assignments. 

Section 9. 

Purchase of Land by Tribe. 

Tribal funds may be used to acquire land

under the following circumstances:

(a) 

Land within or without the Lac du Flambeau Reservation which is not now 
in trust or restricted Indian ownership may be purchased by or for the Lac du Flambeau Band 
of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, either with funds under control of the Tribal Council, 
or, if the Secretary of the Interior consents, with other tribal funds.

(b) 

Restricted or trust lands, including land in heirship status, may be purchased 
with funds under the control of the Tribal Council, or; if the Secretary of the Interior 
consents; with other tribal funds.

Section 10. Method of Making Assignments. Applications for assignments 
shall be filed with the Secretary of the Council, and shall be in writing, setting forth the name 
of the person or persons applying for the land and as accurate a description of the land 
desired as the circumstances shall permit.

Notices of all applications received by the Secretary shall be posted by him in the 
Agency office and in at least three other conspicuous places in the district in which the land 
is located for not less than twenty (20) days before action is taken by the Council. Any 
member of the Tribe wishing to oppose the granting of an assignment shall do so in writing, 
setting forth his objections to be filed with the Secretary of the Council, and may if he so 
desires appear before the Council to present evidence. The Secretary of the Council shall 
furnish the Superintendent or other officers-in-charge of the Agency a complete record of all 
actions taken by the council on applications for assignments of land, and a complete record 
of assignment shall be kept in the Agency office and shall be open for inspection by members 
of the Tribe.

The Council shall draw up one or more forms for "standard" and "exchange" 

assignments, which shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution and Bylaws may be ratified and approved in the 
same manner as this Constitution and Bylaws. Whenever the Tribal Council by a vote of 
eight (8) members shall consider an amendment necessary such amendment shall be sent to 
the Secretary of the Interior. It shall then be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call 
an election. If at such election the amendment is adopted by a majority vote of the adult 
members of the Tribe, residing on the reservation at least one (1) year prior to the date of the 
election, voting thereon in an election in which at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled 
to vote shall vote, such amendment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior and 
if approved by him shall thereupon become effective.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - TRIBAL GENERAL FUND BUDGET

 
 Section 1. For the purposes of this Article, the Tribal General Fund includes all 
funds received by the Tribe, from income of Tribal enterprises, donations, unrestricted 

grants, or other sources which are not held in trust for the Tribe by the United States of 
America, and which are not restricted as to use.

Section 2. No later than 90 days prior to the end of the current fiscal year, the 
Tribal Administrator shall prepare and submit to the Tribal Council a projection of Tribal 
General Fund revenues for the next year and a proposed budget for expenditures of such 
funds. The Tribal Council shall post notice and hold a public informational session on 
proposed budget. The Tribal Council shall then set and hold a public hearing on the 
proposed budget no later than 60 days prior to the end of the fiscal year. No later than 45 
days prior to the end of the fiscal year the Tribal Council shall adopt a proposed Tribal 
General Fund budget and conduct a popular referendum on the budget as a whole.

Section 3. 

If the Tribal General Fund budget is approved by a vote of a majority
of Tribal members voting at the popular referendum, such budget shall govern Tribal General 
Fund expenditures for the next fiscal year. If the General Fund budget is disapproved, the 
Tribal Council shall hold an additional public hearing, adopt a new proposed Tribal General 
Fund budget, and conduct a popular referendum on such budget. If this revised budget is 
disapproved, the Tribal Council may, in its discretion, present further proposed budgets for 
referendum or follow the Tribal General Fund budget for the preceding year. Until a Tribal 
General Fund budget is approved by referendum, expenditure of the Tribal General Fund 
shall be made in accordance with the approved budget for the preceding year. Such approved 
budget shall not be increased beyond fifteen percent (15%).

Section 4. The Tribal Council shall appropriate and expend the Tribal General 
Fund in accordance with the budget approved by referendum. The Tribal Council may, by 
resolution, increase or decrease expenditures provided that no such change shall exceed 
fifteen percentum (15%) of each approved budget line item involved in the change. Any 
budget modification which results in a change of any budget line item in excess of fifteen 
percentum (15%) shall not be effective until approved by popular referendum.
 
 

ARTICLE X - JUDICIARY

 
 Section 1. 

Composition. There shall be a Tribal Trial Court and an Appeals 
Court of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians and such other court 
of special jurisdiction and other forums of special jurisdiction for traditional dispute 
resolution as deemed necessary and appointed by the Tribal Council.

(a) 

The Tribal Trial Court shall consist of one Chief Trial Judge and such 
number of Associate Trial Judges as the Tribal council shall deem necessary 
and appropriate.

(b) 

The Appeals Court shall consist of a panel of three judges.

Section 2. 

Judicial Powers. The judicial power of the Lac du Flambeau Band of
Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians shall be vested in the Judiciary. The Judiciary shall have the 

powers to interpret and apply the Constitution and laws of the Lac du Flambeau Band of 
Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians.

Section 3. 

Jurisdiction. The Tribal Trial Court shall have the original jurisdiction
over all cases and controversies, both criminal and civil, in law or in equity, arising under the 
Constitution, laws, customs, and traditions of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior 
Ojibwe, including all actions in which the provisions of the Indian Child Welfare Act of 
1978 , 25 U.S.C., sec. 1901, et.seq., are applicable and cases in which the Tribe, or its 
officials and employees shall be a party. This grant of jurisdiction shall not be construed as 
a waiver of the Tribe’s sovereign immunity.

Section 4. 

Powers of the Courts.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

The Tribal Trial Court shall have the power to make findings of fact and 
conclusions of law. The Trial Court shall have the power to issue all 
remedies in law and in equity including injunctive and declarative relief and 
all writs including attachment and mandamus.

The Tribal Trial Court shall have the power to declare the laws of the Lac du 
Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians void if such laws are not 
consistent with the Tribe’s Constitution.

The Appeals Court shall hear appeals allowed by the Tribal Court Code, 
Chapter 80. The jurisdiction shall be limited to a review of final order, 
sentences, and judgment of the trial court.

Section 5. 

Qualifications. No person shall be eligible for selection as a judge 

unless he or she:

(a) 

is at least 30 years of age;

(b) 

is of good moral character and integrity;

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

has never been convicted of an offense termed a felony by the laws of the Lac 
du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians, the State of Wisconsin, 
an Indian Tribe, or the United States;

has not been convicted of any other crime involving dishonesty or moral 
turpitude;

is capable of preparing papers and conducting hearings incident to the offices 
of the Judge;

has demonstrated knowledge of the Lac du Flambeau Tribal Code and 
Ordinances and an understanding of the federal and state laws.

Section 6. Term. Each judge shall hold office for a period of three (3) years 
unless sooner removed for cause, as defined in the Judicial Code of 
Ethics and/or Chapter 80, or by reason of resignation, death, or 
incapacitation. Judges shall be eligible for reappointment, subject to 
the eligibility requirements pursuant to Section 5 herein.

Section 7. Appointment of Judges.

(a) 

(b) 

The Tribal Council shall select, by majority vote, Tribal Trial Court and 
Appeals Court Judges from eligible candidates, as defined in Section 5 herein 
and in Chapter 80, at Tribal Council meetings in which a quorum is present.

Each judge selected by a majority vote shall then be appointed by the Tribal 
Council to a term of service.

Section 8. Disqualification and Removal of Judges.

(a) 

Disqualifications.

(1) 

(2) 

A Trial judge shall be disqualified to sit on any case in which he or 
she has any direct interest, is or has been a pre-trial witness, or is so 
related to a party as to render it improper for him or her to preside at 
the trial proceedings. Upon disqualification, an alternate trial judge 
shall sit on the case.

An appellant judge shall be disqualified to hear the appeal in any case
in which he or she has any direct interest, or has been a witness at 
trial, or is so related to a party as to render it improper for him or her 
to hear the appeal. Upon disqualification, the position of the 
appellate judge will be filed for the purpose of hearing the particular 
case by the other judges of the Court of Appeals.

(b) 

Suspension and Removal.

(1) 

A judge may be suspended from office upon written charges brought
for his or her removal which recite good cause as defined by the 
Judicial Code of Ethics and/or Chapter 80. A hearing shall be held 
before the Lac du Flambeau Judicial Committee within ten (10) 
working days of the judge’s receipt of written notice of the charges, 
at which time the judge shall be provided with the opportunity to 
respond to the charges against him or her, including the presentation 
of the testimony of witnesses in his or her behalf. A judge may be 
removed only for good cause shown at the hearing, and;

(a) 

(b) 

a vote taken by secret ballot of a two-thirds (2/3) majority of 
the Judicial Committee recommending removal, at which at 
least four (4) members are present, and;

a vote taken by secret ballot of a two-thirds (2/3) majority of 
the Tribal Council at a meeting held for that purpose at which 
at least eight (8) members are present.

(2) 

Upon resignation, death, removal, or physical or mental 
incapacitation of a judge, the Lac du Flambeau Judicial Committee 
shall recommend a replacement to the Tribal Council. The Tribal 
Council shall vote by majority on such individual who shall serve the 
remainder of that term.

Amendment adopted by Secretarial Election on July 26, 2005, approved by Bureau of Indian 
Affairs on September 9, 2005, effective date September 9, 2005.


BYLAWS OF THE LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF LAKE SUPERIOR 
CHIPPEWA INDIANS OF WISCONSIN

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS


Section 1. 

The President of the Tribal Council shall preside at all meetings of the
Council. He shall at all times have general supervision of the affairs of the Tribal Council 
and such matters as naturally pertain to the general welfare of the community. It shall also 
be the duty of the President to countersign all checks drawn against funds of the Tribe by the 
Treasurer. He shall vote only in case of a tie. The President shall be ex-officio member of 
all subordinate boards and committees.

Section 2. 

In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall preside at all 
meetings of the Tribal Council and shall act in his stead in all matters pertaining to the office 
of the President.

Section 3. 

The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the 
Tribal Council and furnish copies thereof to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction. He shall 
attend to the keeping of the official records of the Tribal Council and shall be responsible for 
the prompt and efficient handling of all correspondence pertaining to the business of the 
Tribal Council. All official records of the Tribal Secretary shall be open to inspection by the 
members of the Tribe at all times. The Secretary shall be ex-officio member of all 
subordinate boards and committees.

Section 4. 

The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in possession of the 
Tribe from any source. He shall be bonded by a surety company of recognized standing in 
an amount to be determined by the Tribal Council, such surety company and bond to be 
approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He shall keep an accurate record of all 

such funds and shall disburse the same in accordance with the vote of the Tribal Council and 
as designated by this Constitution and Bylaws. The books shall be open to audit and 
examination by the duly authorized officers of the Secretary of the Interior at all times.

The records of the Treasurer shall be open to inspection by members of the Tribe, 

members of the Tribal Council and its officers.

Section 5. 

The subordinate officers, boards, and committees of the Tribal Council
shall perform such duties as the Tribal Council shall, by resolution, from time to time 
provide.
 
 

ARTICLE II - OATH

 
 All officers when elected shall be duly installed and subscribe to an oath of office to 
support the Constitution of the United States and this Constitution. Such officers may be 
sworn in by any officer qualified to administer an oath.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. 

Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held on the first Friday
of January, April, July and October, and at such other times as the Council shall designate. 
Special meetings shall be held at the discretion of the president, or upon request of three (3) 
members of the Tribal Council. Five (5) days written notice shall be given to all Council 
members.

Section 2. 

Seven (7) members shall constitute a quorum.

Section 3. 

The Tribal Council shall prescribe such rules of order for its meetings

as it desires.

Section 4. 
public to the Tribe.

The meetings of the Tribal Council except executive sessions shall be
 
 

ARTICLE IV - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws, when ratified by a majority of vote of the adult 
members of the Lac Du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians of Wisconsin 
voting at a special election called for the purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
PROVIDED, that at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 
election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and, if approved, shall be 
effective from the date of approval.

Includes Amendments:

I - Approved June 25, 1943
II - Approved June 2, 1945
III - Approved June 25, 1943
IV - Approved June 21, 1953
V - Approved June 19, 1959
VI - Approved November 13, 1961
VII, VIII, IX, X, XI - Approved August 19, 1974
XII, XIII, XIV - Approved September 10, 1982
XV - Approved June 22, 1983
XVI - Approved November 5, 1985
XVII - Approved November 5, 1985
XVIII - Approved February 28, 1995
XIX - Approved July 22, 2002
XX - Approved July 22, 2002
XXI - Approved July 22, 2002
XXII - Approved July 22, 2002
XXIII - Approved September 9, 2005


AMENDMENT XIX
CONSTITUTION AND BY LAWS
OF THE
LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF
LAKE SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS
OF WISCONSIN


ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, Subsection 1(b) 
shall be amended to remove Secretary of Interior approval of attorney contracts and the 
fixing of fees. Subsection 1(b) shall be amended to read as follows:

(b) To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement of the rights of the Lac 
du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians and its members.

Adopted by Secretarial election: 

June 11, 2002

Approved: 

July 22, 2002

Effective date: 

July 22, 2002


AMENDMENT XX
CONSTITUTION AND BY LAWS
OF THE
LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF
LAKE SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS
OF WISCONSIN


ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, Subsection 1(i) 
shall be amended to remove Secretary of Interior review of ordinances directly relating to 
non-members of the Tribe and to grant the approval of such ordinances to the Tribe by 
popular referendum. Subsection 1(i) shall be amended to read as follows:

To promulgate legislation, statutes, codes and ordinances, which provide for taxes, 
(i) 
assessments, or license fees, or obtaining special rights or privileges, and the same, 
PROVIDED, such legislative enactments governing the activity of all persons within the 
Reservation boundaries have been approved by a popular referendum of the Tribe 
delegating enforcement of these legislative actions to the Tribal Council.

Adopted by Secretarial election: 
Approved: 
Effective date: 

July 22, 2002

July 22, 2002

June 11, 2002


AMENDMENT XXI
CONSTITUTION AND BY LAWS
OF THE
LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF
LAKE SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS
OF WISCONSIN


ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, Subsection 1(m) 
shall be amended to authorize the promulgation of legislation, statutes, codes and 
ordinances allowing for the purchase of land through condemnation proceedings, and 
delegating the power of condemnation to the Tribal Council. Subsection 1(m) shall be 
amended to read as follows:

(m) 

To promulgate legislation, statutes, codes and ordinances, to purchase land 
for the Tribe for public purpose under condemnation proceedings delegating such power 
of condemnation to the Tribal Council; PROVIDED, that each decision to purchase land 
under condemnation proceedings shall be based on a public purpose and shall be necessary 
to protect the political integrity, economic security, or health and welfare of the Tribe; and 
FURTHER PROVIDED, that allotted lands shall not be available for purchase under this 
section.

Adopted by Secretarial election:

June 11, 2002

Approved: 

July 22, 2002

Effective date: 

July 22, 2002


AMENDMENT XXII
CONSTITUTION AND BY LAWS
OF THE
LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF
LAKE SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS
OF WISCONSIN


ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL, Subsection 1(n) 
shall be amended to remove Secretary of Interior review of ordinances directly relating to 
non-members of the Tribe intending to regulate the conduct of trade and the use and 
disposition of property within the territory of the Tribe. Subsection 1(n) shall be amended 
to read as follows:

(n) 

To promulgate legislation, statutes, codes and ordinances, intended to 
safeguard and promote peace, safety, morals, and the general welfare of the Tribe by 
regulating the conduct of trade and the use and disposition of property within the territory 
of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Chippewa Indians, as defined in Article I - 
Territory-Jurisdiction, including the conduct, the use, and the creation of a land and title 
office, and the conveyance of property upon the Reservation, delegating the enforcement 
of these legislative actions to the Tribal Council.

Adopted by Secretarial election:
Approved: 
Effective date: 

July 22, 2002

July 22, 2002

June 11, 2002


AMENDMENT XXIII 
CONSTITUTION AND BY LAWS 
OF THE
LAC DU FLAMBEAU BAND OF 
LAKE SUPERIOR CHIPPEWA INDIANS 
OF WISCONSIN

ARTICLE X -JUDICIARY SHALL BE ADDED TO PROVIDE FOR A TWO TIERED 
JUDICIARY SYSTEM CONSISTING OF A TRIBAL TRIAL COURT AND AN APPEALS 

COURT AND SHALL READ AS FOLLOWS:

Section 1. 

Composition.

There shall be a Tribal Trial Court and an Appeals Court of the Lac du Flambeau Band 
of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians and such other court of special jurisdiction and other 
forums of special jurisdiction for traditional dispute resolution as deemed necessary and 
appointed by the Tribal Council.

(a) 

The Tribal Trial Court shall consist of one Chief Trial Judge and such number of 
Associate Trial Judges as the Tribal council shall deem necessary and appropriate.

(b) 

The Appeals Court shall consist of a panel of three judges.

Section 2. 

Judicial Powers.

The judicial power of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians shall 
be vested in the Judiciary. The Judiciary shall have the powers to interpret and apply the 
Constitution and laws of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians.

Section 3. 

Jurisdiction.

The Tribal Trial Court shall have the original jurisdiction over all cases and controversies, 
both criminal and civil, in law or in equity, arising under the Constitution, laws, customs, 
and traditions of the Lac du Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe, including all 
actions in which the provisions of the Indian Child Welfare Act of 1978 , 25 U.S.C., sec. 
1901, et.seq., are applicable and cases in which the Tribe, or its officials and employees 
shall be a party. This grant of jurisdiction shall not be construed as a waiver of the 
Tribe’s sovereign immunity.

Section 4. 

Powers of the Courts.

(a) 

The Tribal Trial Court shall have the power to make findings of fact and 
conclusions of law. The Trial Court shall have the power to issue all remedies in 
law and in equity including injunctive and declarative relief and all writs 
including attachment and mandamus.

(b) 

(c) 

The Tribal Trial Court shall have the power to declare the laws of the Lac du 
Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians void if such laws are not 
consistent with the Tribe’s Constitution.

The Appeals Court shall hear appeals allowed by the Tribal Court Code, Chapter 
80. The jurisdiction shall be limited to a review of final order, sentences, and 
judgment of the trial court.

Section 5. 

Qualifications.

No person shall be eligible for selection as a judge unless he or she:

(a) 

is at least 30 years of age;

(b) 

is of good moral character and integrity;

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

has never been convicted of an offense termed a felony by the laws of the Lac du 
Flambeau Band of Lake Superior Ojibwe Indians, the State of Wisconsin, an 
Indian Tribe, or the United States;

has not been convicted of any other crime involving dishonesty or moral 
turpitude;

is capable of preparing papers and conducting hearings incident to the offices of 
the Judge;

has demonstrated knowledge of the Lac du Flambeau Tribal Code and Ordinances 
and an understanding of the federal and state laws.

Section 6. 

Term.

Each judge shall hold office for a period of three (3) years unless sooner removed for 
cause, as defined in the Judicial Code of Ethics and/or Chapter 80, or by reason of 
resignation, death, or incapacitation. Judges shall be eligible for reappointment, subject 
to the eligibility requirements pursuant to Section 5 herein.

Section 7. 

Appointment of Judges.

(a) 

(b) 

The Tribal Council shall select, by majority vote, Tribal Trial Court and Appeals 
Court Judges from eligible candidates, as defined in Section 5 herein and in 
Chapter 80, at Tribal Council meetings in which a quorum is present.

Each judge selected by a majority vote shall then be appointed by the Tribal 
Council to a term of service.

Section 8. Disqualification and Removal of Judges.

(a) 

Disqualifications.

(1) 

(2) 

A Trial judge shall be disqualified to sit on any case in which he or she 
has any direct interest, is or has been a pre-trial witness, or is so related to 
a party as to render it improper for him or her to preside at the trial 
proceedings. Upon disqualification, an alternate trial judge shall sit on the 
case.

An appellant judge shall be disqualified to hear the appeal in any case in 
which he or she has any direct interest, or has been a witness at trial, or is 
so related to a party as to render it improper for him or her to hear the 
appeal. Upon disqualification, the position of the appellate judge will be 
filed for the purpose of hearing the particular case by the other judges of 
the Court of Appeals.

(b) 

Suspension and Removal.

(1) 

A judge may be suspended from office upon written charges brought for 
his or her removal which recite good cause as defined by the Judicial 
Code of Ethics and/or Chapter 80. A hearing shall be held before the Lac 
du Flambeau Judicial Committee within ten (10) working days of the 
judge’s receipt of written notice of the charges, at which time the judge 
shall be provided with the opportunity to respond to the charges against 
him or her, including the presentation of the testimony of witnesses in his 
or her behalf. A judge may be removed only for good cause shown at the 
hearing, and;

(a) 

(b) 

a vote taken by secret ballot of a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the 
Judicial Committee recommending removal, at which at least four 
(4) members are present, and;

a vote taken by secret ballot of a two-thirds (2/3) majority of the 
Tribal Council at a meeting held for that purpose at which at least 
eight (8) members are present.

(2) 

Upon resignation, death, removal, or physical or mental incapacitation of 
a judge, the Lac du Flambeau Judicial Committee shall recommend a 
replacement to the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall vote by 
majority on such individual who shall serve the remainder of that term.

Adopted by Secretarial election: 
September 9, 2005
Approved: 
Effective date: 

September 9, 2005

July 26, 2005

