DATE DOWNLOADED: Mon Jul 18 17:24:33 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa (1998).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution of the Little River B& of Ottawa (1998).

APA 7th ed.
(1998). Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution of the Little River B& of Ottawa (S.I.: s.n., 1998)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa (s.n., 1998

MLA 9th ed.
Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

United States Department of the Interior

IN REFLY REFER TO.
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 Washington, D.C. 20240
JUL 10 1998

Tribal Government Services - TR

Mr. Larry Morrin
Area Director, Minneapolis Area Office 
Bureau of Indian Affairs
331 South 2nd Street
Minneapolis, Minnesota 55401-2241

Dear Mr. Morrin:

We have received the results of the election held on May 27, 1998, by the qualified voters 
of the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians (Tribe). The election was called in accordance 
with an order issued by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs on January 20, 1998, 
which permitted the qualified voters of the Tribe to vote on the adoption or rejection of the 
proposed Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa.

As evidenced by the completed Certificate of Results of Election, the proposed constitution 
was duly adopted on May 27, 1998, by a vote of 553 for, 32 against and 3 ballots found 
spoiled, in an election in which at least thirty percent of the 833 members registered and 
entitled to vote cast their ballots.

The Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa, as adopted on May 27, 1997, is hereby 
approved pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) and delegated to me by Secretarial 
Order No. 3150 as extended by Secretarial Order No. 3177, as amended. Please deliver the 
enclosed approved original document to the Tribe.

Sincerely,

Deputy Commissioner of Andian Affairs

Enclosure

cc: 

Superintendent, Michigan Agency
Chairman, Little River Band of Ottawa
Assistant Solicitor, Tribal Government & Alaska, MS/MIB-6456
 
 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 
LITTLE RIVER BAND OF OTTAWA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Little River Ottawa people have asserted our sovereignty throughout history 
including in the Treaty of Chicago [August 29, 1821; 7 Stat 218], the Treaty of Washington 
[March 28, 1836; 7 Stat 491], and the Treaty of Detroit [July 31, 1855; 11 Stat 621].

Between the last treaty and the present day, the Grand River Ottawa people who 
became the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians were known and organized under several 
names, including members of "Indian Village" on the Manistee River, residents of the Pere 
Marquette Village or "Indian Town", Unit No. 7 of the Northern Michigan Ottawa 
Association, the Thomapple River Band, and finally the Little River Band of Ottawa 
Indians.

On September 21, 1994, Public Law 103-324 (108 Stat 2156) was enacted, 
reaffirming federal recognition of and confirming the sovereignty of the Grand River Bands 
comprising the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians {referred to as the Tribe or Little River 
Band).

As an exercise of our sovereign powers, in order to organize for our common good, 
to govern ourselves under our own laws, to maintain and foster our tribal culture, provide 
for the welfare and prosperity of our people, and to protect our homeland we adopt this 
constitution, in accordance with the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, as 
amended, as the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 Section 1. Territory. The territory of the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians shall 
encompass all lands which are now or hereinafter owned by or reserved for the Tribe, 
including the Manistee Reservation in Manistee County (Michigan), Custer and Eden 
Townships in Mason County (Michigan) and all lands which are now or at a later date 
owned by the Tribe or held in trust for the Tribe or any member of the Tribe by the United 
States of America.

Section 2. Jurisdiction Distinguished From Territory. The Tribe's jurisdiction over its 
members and territory shall be exercised to the fullest extent consistent with this 
Constitution, the sovereign powers of the Tribe, and federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Eligibility for Membership. An individual is eligible for membership in the 
Tribe, if he/she possesses at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Indian blood, of which at least 
one-eighth (1/8) degree must be Grand River Ottawa or Michigan Ottawa blood and:

(a) 

Is a lineal descendant of a member of the historic Grand River Bands who resided 
in Manistee, Mason, Wexford or Lake Counties in the State of Michigan, who was 
listed on the schedule of Grand River Ottawa in the Durant Roll of 1908 as 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior on February 18, 1910; or,

(b) 

Is a lineal descendant of individuals listed on the 1870 Annuity Payrolls of 
Chippewas and Ottawas of Michigan listed under the following Ottawa Chiefs:

Kewacushkum 
Shaw-be-quo-ung 
Maw-gaw-ne-quong 

Pay-quo-tush 
Penayse 
Ching-gawa-she 

Me-tay-wis
Kaw-gay-gaw-bowe
Aken Bell; and,

(c) 

Is not currently enrolled in any other federally recognized Indian Tribe, band, or 
group.

Section 2. Membership Rights of Children Who Have Been Adopted. Any child who is 
less than 18 years of age, who meets the membership criteria in Section 1, shall be eligible 
for membership, notwithstanding such adoption.

Section 3. Dual Membership Prohibition. Any member of the Little River Band who 
applies for and is accepted as a member of another federally recognized Indian Tribe or 
band shall be subject to disenrollment in accordance with Section 4 of this Article.

Section 4. Membership Procedure, The Tribal Council shall establish ordinances 
governing membership, including but not limited to enrollment and disenrollment; 
Provided that the Tribal Council shall not have the power to change or establish 
substantive requirements for membership in addition to those established in this Article.

Section 5. Right of Appeal. Any person whose application for membership has been 
denied, or any member who has been disenrolled, shall have the right to appeal to the 
Tribal Court.
 
 

ARTICLE III - CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. Civil Rights. The Little River Band in exercising the powers of 
self -government shall not:

(a) 

(b) 

Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging the 
freedom of speech, or of the press, or of the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances;

Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and 
effects against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

(c) 

Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

(d) 

Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;

(e) 

Take any private property for a public use without Just compensation;

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial, 
to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the 
witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his 
favor, and at his own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

Require excessive ball, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual 
punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense any penalty 
or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of one year or a fine of five 
thousand dollars ($5000.00), or both, or the maximum penalty allowed under 
Federal law;

Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or deprive 
any person of liberty or property without due process of law;

Pass any legislation, directed against a designated person, pronouncing him/her 
guilty of an alleged crime, without trial or conviction or ex post facto law, which 
retroactively changes the legality or consequences of a fact or action after the 
occurrence of that fact or commission of the act;

(j) 

Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the right, 
upon request, to a trial by Jury of not less than six (6) persons;

(k)  Make or enforce any law unreasonably infringing the right of tribal members to 

keep and bear arms; or

(l) 

The enumeration of rights in this Constitution shall not be construed to deny or 
disparage other rights retained by tribal members.

Section 2. Access to Tribal Records. Subject to any express limitations contained in 
this Constitution, the laws of the United States, and individual Tribal members' and Tribal 
employees’ rights to privacy, members of the Tribe shall be provided access to review the 
records of Tribe including, but not limited to: minutes of all meetings of the Tribal Council 
or other subdivisions of the Tribal government, Tribal budgets and financial reports of 
Tribal expenditures; provided that such review shall be conducted during normal office 
hours.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The legislative powers of the Little River Band shall be invested in the Tribal 
Council.

Section 2. Composition of the Tribal Council.

(a) 

(b) 

The Tribal Council shall consist of nine (9) persons, elected by popular vote of the 
registered voters of the Tribe in the manner described in this Section and Article IX.

Tribal Council positions shall be elected by the membership from the following 
districts:

1. 

2. 

3. 

Six (6) of the nine (9) members of the Tribal Council shall be elected by the 
registered voters of the Tribe who reside in the following Counties in the 
State of Michigan: Kent, Lake, Manistee, Mason, Muskegon, Newago, 
Oceana, Ottawa and Wexford:

Two (2) of the nine (9) members of the Tribal Council shall be elected by all 
of the registered voters of the Tribe:

One (1) of the nine (9) members of the Tribal Council shall be elected by 
those registered voters of the Tribe residing outside the nine (9) county 
district defined in subsection 2(b)(1) of this Section.

(c) 

The Council shall select two (2) Council members, by majority vote of the Council, 
to serve as Council Officers: Speaker and Recorder. Officers terms shall be two 
years. A single Council member may not hold both Officer positions.

Section 3. Qualifications. Any member of the Tribe who is twenty-one (21) years of age 
or older who has resided within the State of Michigan for at least six (6) months prioi- to 
the date of the next scheduled election may serve on the Tribal Council.

Section 4. 

Terms of Office.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Except as provided for in Section 1 of Article IX in this Constitution each Tribal 
Council member's term of office shall be four (4) years.

Tribal Council members shall continue in office until their successors are sworn in 
by the Tribal Court, their office is deemed vacant, or they are removed from the 
Tribal Council.

If any Tribal Council member ceases to be a member of the Tribe, he or she shall 
automatically forfeit his or her Council position.

If any Tribal Council member ceases to be a resident of the State of Michigan, he
or she shall automatically forfeit his or her Council position.

(e) 

There shall be no prohibition against continuous service.

Section 5.  Council Officers Duties.

(a) 

Speaker. The Speaker of the Council shall:

1. 

Preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council.

2. 

3. 

4. 

Call special meetings of the Council, when appropriate.

Receive reports from the committees or commissions and deliver such 
reports to the Council.

Perform the duties of the Tribal Ogema in the absence of or due to the 
inability of the Ogema to perform those duties.

(b) 

Recorder. The Recorder of the Council shall:

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Submit a record of the minutes of all Tribal Council meetings, and make 
such reports available to the membership of the Tribe.

Keep the Members informed as to the status of the activities of the Council 
and all other matters affecting the Tribe and its members.

Maintain and protect the Tribal Seal.

Perform the duties of the Speaker if the Speaker is absent or unable to fulfill 
those duties.

Section 6. Meetings of the Tribal Council.

(a) 

Regular Meetings. The Tribal Council shall meet in regular session at least once 
every month at a time and place to be set by the Tribal Council. The schedule of 
meetings for regular sessions of the Tribal Council for the next calendar year shall 
be set by resolution of the Tribal Council at the last regular session of each 
calendar year. The meeting schedule for each calendar year shall be published and 
made available to the General Membership,

(b) 

Special Meetings. A special meeting of the Tribal Council may be held under the 
following conditions:

1. 

2. 

A special meeting shall be called (i) upon written request of the Tribal Ogema
submitted to the Council Recorder, (ii) upon written request, submitted to 
the Tribal Ogema or Council Recorder, by two (2) members of the Tribal 
Council, (ill) upon written request, submitted to the Tribal Ogema or Council 
Recorder, signed by at least ten percent (10%) of the Tribal Elders, fifty-five 
(55) years or older; or (iv) upon a petition of ten percent (10%) of the 
registered Tribal voters requesting a meeting submitted to the Tribal Ogema 
or Council Recorder.

There shall be at least seventy-two (72) hours written notice sent to the 
Council members at each member's designated regular mailing address. 
Notice shall also be posted in the Tribal Office or Governmental Center. No 
business may be transacted if proper notices have not been mailed and 
posted. The notice shall specify all business to be addressed, and no matter 
which is not included in the notice may be addressed at the meeting.

(c) 

Emergency Meetings. Emergency meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by 
the Tribal Ogema or Speaker upon less than seventy-two (72) hours written notice, 
if such meetings are necessary for the preservation or protection of the health, 
welfare, peace, safety or property of the Tribe. Efforts shall be made to ensure that 
each Tribal Council member receives notice of such meetings. Where practical, 
notice shall be posted at the Tribal Office or Governmental Center. Notices shall 
state the purpose, time and place of the meeting. No business other than that 
stated in the notice shall be transacted at such meetings.

(d) 

Open Meetings; Closed Sessions. All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be open 
to the Tribal Membership. However, the Council may meet in closed session for the 
following purposes:

1. 

2. 

Personnel Matters, provided the employee in question did not request a 
public meeting, or

Business matters involving consideration of bids or contracts which are 
privileged or confidential, or

3. 

Claims by and against the Tribe.

Minutes shall be maintained relating to all business conducted in open or closed 
session. The general reason for a determination to meet in closed session shall be placed 
on the record in open session. The minutes of business conducted in closed session shall 
be maintained in a closed file in perpetuity; however, such minutes of closed sessions may 
be opened to the public upon a vote of the majority of the Tribal Council, upon final 
disposition of the matter concerned or upon order of the Tribal Judiciary. Upon 
conclusion of a closed session, announcement of the resumption of open session shall be 
made before adjournment.

(e) 

Rules of the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall determine Its own rules of 
procedure for meetings of the Tribal Council, subject to any limitations imposed in 
this Constitution. Such rules and procedures shall provide for an opportunity for 
the General Membership to be heard on any question under consideration by the 
Tribal Council.

(f) 

Quorum required to conduct business.

1. 

2. 

A quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of six (6) members, provided at 
least four (4) of the six (6) members present represent the nine (9) county 
district defined in subsection 2(b)(1) of Article IV.

When a Council Member has a personal interest in an issue or matter to be 
voted on by the Council, other than those common to all Tribal Members, 
which would require balancing personal interest against interests of the 
Tribe, such member shall abstain from voting on that matter due to conflict 
or interest and shall disclose the nature of the conflict.

3. 

4. 

The fact that a member may not vote on an issue due to conflict of interest 
shall not prevent that member from voting on other matters or from 
determining a quorum’s existence. 

Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest is cause for removal, and 
where a matter of potential conflict has been disclosed, the Council shall 
determine by majority vote whether a member shall abstain from voting, 
although no member shall be compelled to vote regarding an issue as to 
which he or she believes a conflict exists.

(g) Action by the Tribal Council.

1. 

2. 

The Tribal Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion.

Tribal Council action shall be determined by a majority of the quorum 
present and voting at the meeting, unless otherwise specified in this 
Constitution, and minutes shall identify each Council Member's vote on 
every issue. 

Section 7. Powers of the Tribal Council. The legislative powers of the Little River Band 
of Ottawa Indians shall be vested in the Tribal Council, subject to any express limitations 
contained in this Constitution. The Tribal Council shall have the power, including by way 
of illustration, but not by limitation:

(a) 

To exercise the inherent powers of the Little River Band by establishing laws 
through the enactment of ordinances and adoption of resolutions not inconsistent 
with this Constitution: 

:

i

<

j
 
 

J 

 
 ;

;

;

!

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

to govern the conduct of members of the Little River Band and other persons 
within its jurisdiction;

to promote, protect and provide for public health, peace, morals, education 
and general welfare of the Little River Band and its members;

to provide by ordinance for the jurisdiction of the Tribe over Indian Child 
Welfare matters, and all other domestic relations matters:

to provide for the manner of making, holding and revoking assignments of 
the Little River Band's land or interests therein;

(b) 

(c) 

To authorize and ratify agreements and contracts negotiated by the Tribal Ogema 
on behalf of the Little River Band with federal, state and local governments and 
other Indian tribes or their departments or political subdivisions, or with private 
persons on all matters within the authority of the Tribal Council;

To purchase, lease, take by gift, take by devise or bequest, or otherwise acquire 
land, interests in land, personal property or other assets which may be deemed 
beneficial to the Little River Band;

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of Little River Band 
land, interests in land, personal property or other assets;

To employ legal counsel, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior so 
long as such approval is required by Federal law;

To create by ordinance regulatory commissions or subordinate organizations and 
to delegate to such organizations the power to manage the affairs and enterprises 
of the Little River Band, provided that no such commission or subordinate 
organization shall exercise powers of the Tribal Council unless they are expressly 
delegated by the Tribal Council;

(g) 

To establish rules and procedures to regulate all meetings of the Tribal Council, 
standing committees, special committees and such other regulatory commissions 
or subordinate organizations created by ordinance;

(h) 

To approve appointments to the Tribal Court, regulatory commissions and heads 
of subordinate organizations created by ordinance;

(i) To exercise the following fiscal powers:

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

Subject to the veto of the Tribal Ogema, to adopt, approve or amend the 
annual budget presented by the Tribal Ogema and to authorize the 
expenditure of funds in accordance with such budgets;

To manage any funds within the exclusive control of the Little River Band 
and to appropriate these funds for the benefit of the Tribe and its members. 
All expenditures of funds shall be pursuant to appropriations or budgets 
authorized by resolution or in accordance with ordinances of the Tribal 
Council;

To levy duties, fees, taxes and assessments on any person, natural or 
corporate, residing or doing business within the territorial jurisdiction of the 
Little River Band;

To borrow money or to issue temporary or long term evidence of 
indebtedness for public purposes and to secure the repayment thereof;

(j) To take action, not inconsistent with this Constitution or Federal law, which shall 
be necessary and proper to carry out the sovereign legislative powers of the Tribe.

Section 10. Tribal Powers and Rights Not Limited.

(a) 

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Little River Band but not expressly 
referred to in this Constitution shall not be diminished, abridged, or divested by 
this Article.

(b) 

The Tribal Council may exercise such additional powers as may be conferred upon
the Tribe in the future by law, by the Secretary of the Interior, or by any other duly 
authorized official or agency of the federal government, state or local government, 
or by another Indian tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE V - TRIBAL OGEMA

 
 Section 1. The Executive powers of the Little River Band shall be invested in the Tribal 
Ogema.

Section 2. Qualifications. Any member of the Tribe who is twenty-five (25) years of age 
or older, who has resided within the nine (9) county district defined in subsection 2(b)(1) 
of Article IV, for at least six (6) months prior to the date of the next scheduled election may 
serve as Tribal Ogema.

Section 3. Term of Office.

(a) 

The Tribal Ogema's term of office shall be four (4) years.

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

The Tribal Ogema will continue in office until his/her successor is sworn in by the 
Tribal Court, the office is deemed vacant, or he/she is removed as the Tribal 
Ogema.

If the Ogema ceases to be a member of the Tribe, he/she will automatically forfeit
the Ogema position.

If the Ogema ceases to reside in the nine (9) county district defined in subsection 
2(b)(1) of Article IV, he/she will automatically forfeit the Ogema position.

(e) 

There shall be no prohibition against continuous service.

Section 4. Election of the Tribal Ogema. The Tribal Ogema shall be the candidate 
seeking the office who receives a majority of the tribal vote cast for that position. If no one 
(1) candidate receives a majority of the votes cast, a run-off election shall be held between 
the two (2) highest vote recipients.

Section 5. Powers of the Ogema.

(a) Subject to any limitations contained in this Constitution, the Tribal Ogema of the 
Little River Band shall be invested with the executive powers of its inherent 
sovereignty including, but not limited to:

1. 

To enforce and execute the laws, ordinances and resolutions of the Tribal 
Council, consistent with this Constitution.

2. 

3. 

To oversee the administration and management of the Tribal. government in 
accordance with the laws, resolutions, and motions adopted by the Tribal 
Council.

To consult, negotiate, and execute agreements and contracts on behalf of the 
Little River Band with federal, state, and local governments and other tribal 
governments, or with private persons or organizations. Agreements and 
contracts reached must be approved or ratified by Tribal Council to be 
effective.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL COURT

 
 Section 1. The judicial power of the Little River Band shall be invested in a Tribal 
judiciary, which shall consist of the Tribal Court, a Court of Appeals, and such inferior 
courts as the Tribal Council may from time to time ordain and establish.

Section 2. Qualifications.

(a) 

Member of the Tribe. Any member of the Tribe who is twenty-five (25) years of age 
or older, who is not a member of the Tribal Council or running for a seat on the 
Tribal Council, and has not been convicted of a felony under Federal, Tribal, or 
State law within the seven (7) year period immediately preceding his/her 
appointment, or convicted of any other crime involving dishonesty or moral 
turpitude, may serve as a Tribal Judge.

(b) 

Non-Member Qualifications. A non-member of the Tribe may be appointed to serve 
as a Tribal judge if such individual possesses a Law degree and has practiced in 
Federal Indian law or as a tribal Judge.

Section 3.  Composition of the Tribal Court System.

(a) 

(b) 

Tribal Court. The Tribal Court shall be a court of general Jurisdiction and shall 
consist of one (1) judge and one (1) associate judge who shall meet as often as 
circumstances require.

Court of Appeals. The Tribal Court of Appeals shall consist of three (3) judges. At 
least one (1) of the three (3) Judges shall be an elder (age 55 years or older) in the 
Tribe, and at least one (1) of the three (3) judges shall be an attorney licensed to 
practice before the courts of a state in the United States.

Section 4. Appointment and Compensation.

(a) 

(b) 

Judges of the Tribal Courts, including the Court of Appeals, shall be appointed by 
the Tribal Ogema, provided such appointment must be confirmed by the Tribal 
Council.

Compensation. The Tribal Council shall have the power to establish the level of 
compensation for each judge; provided that the compensation due to each 
individual judge shall not be diminished during the term of his/her appointment.

(c) 

Tribal Judges shall be sworn in by the Speaker of the Tribal Council.

Section 5. Term of Office.

(a) 

Except as provided for in Section 6 of this Article VI, the term of office for all Tribal 

Judges shall be six (6) years.

(b) 

Tribal Judges will continue in office until a successor is sworn in.

(c) 

There shall be no prohibition against continuous service.

Section 6. Resignation or Removal.

(a) 

(b) 

Resignation. A Tribal Judge may resign his/her office at any time. Resignation is 
immediate upon a Judge submitting written notice to the Tribal Council of his/her 
resignation.

Removal. A Tribal Judge may only be removed by a vote of seven (7) of the nine (9) 
Council Members following a recommendation of removal by a majority of the 
remaining Tribal Judges for tire following reasons:

1. 

2. 

3, 

4. 

Unethical conduct, as defined by the Michigan Indian Judicial Association 
Model Code of Tribal Judicial Conduct;

Gross misconduct or malfeasance in office that is clearly prejudicial to the 
administration of justice;

Ineligibility, under Section 2 of this Article, to serve as a member of the 
Tribal Court;

Inability to fulfill the duties of the office due to mental or physical disability, 
to the extent that he or she is incapable of exercising Judgment about or 
attending to the duties of the Tribal Court. Such determination shall be 
based upon or supported by competent medical evidence or opinion.

If a member of the Tribal judiciary obtains information which indicates that grounds 
exist for removal of another judge, he/she shall provide written notice of the charge and 
specify the facts supporting such charge to all Tribal Judges, including the accused. The 
Judge so charged shall be notified so he/she may answer the charges at a public hearing 
of all members of the Tribal Court held for that purpose. Such hearing shall be noticed 
at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing at which the Judge's referral for removal is to be 
considered. If a majority of the remaining of the Tribal Court vote to refer the Judge to the 
Tribal Council for removal, the grounds for removal shall be set forth with specificity and 
the Tribal Judge shall be suspended from office until the Tribal Council acts on the referral 
at a public meeting of the Tribal Council held to consider that referral. At least ten (10) 
days before the meeting of the Tribal Council at. which the vote for removal will be taken, 
the affected judge shall be provided with a written notice of that meeting. Before any vote 
for removal is taken, the affected judge shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity 
to answer the charges at the Tribal Council meeting. If the Tribal Council, by affirmative 
vote of seven (7) of the nine (9) Council members, finds that grounds for removal as stated 
by the Tribal Court exist, the Tribal Council shall remove the judge from office. If the 
Tribal Council find that the grounds for removal do not exist, the suspended judge shall 
be fully reinstated to the Tribal Court.

Section 7. Vacancy. A vacancy in any Judge position resulting from a Judge's death, 
resignation or removal shall be filled tn the same manner as the original appointment. The

term of office for any Tribal Judge appointed under this Section 6 shall be six (6) years 
from the date of such appointment.

Section 8. Powers of the Tribal Court

(a) The judicial powers of the Little River Band shall extend to all cases and matters 
in law and equity arising under this Constitution, the laws and ordinances of or 
applicable to the Little River Band including but not limited to:

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

To adjudicate all civil and criminal matters arising within the jurisdiction of 
the Tribe or to which the Tribe or an enrolled member of the Tribe is a party.

To review ordinances and resolutions of the Tribal Council or General 
Membership to ensure they are consistent with this Constitution and rule 
void those ordinances and resolutions deemed inconsistent with this 
Constitution.

Hear cases based on ordinances and laws of the Tribe for purpose of 
determining innocence or guilt where trial by jury has been waived.

Assign fines and penalties as allowed for violations of Tribal law, as allowed 
by Tribal and Federal Law.

Grant warrants for search to enforcement officers when just cause is shown.

Grant warrants, writs, injunctions and orders not inconsistent with this
Constitution.

Swear in Tribal Council members and the Tribal Ogema by administering the
oath of office;

Establish, by general rules, the practice and procedures for all courts of the 
Little River Band.

Section 9. Judicial Independence. The Tribal Judiciary shall be independent from the 
legislative and executive functions of the tribal government and no person exercising 
powers of the legislative or executive functions of government shall exercise powers 
properly belonging to the judicial branch of government; provided that the Tribal Council 
shall be empowered to function as the Tribal Court of the Little River Band until the judges 
prescribed by this Article have been appointed; provided further that the first Tribal 
Council and Tribal Ogema elected under this Constitution shall make appointments to its 
courts within ninety (90) days after its members are elected.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - GENERAL MEMBERSHIP POWERS

 
 Section 1. General Membership Meetings.

(a) Meetings of the General Membership of the Little River Band shall be held twice a 

year; once in the spring, once in the fall, at a site suitable for such a meeting.

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

The chairperson for these meetings shall be the Tribal Ogema, who will 
officiate at these meetings.

At these meetings the membership will be informed as to the affairs and 
"state of the Tribe".

Subject to the express limitations contained in this Constitution, motions 
and ordinances adopted by the General Membership shall have the status 
of law and be binding on the Tribal Council, Tribal Ogema and Judiciary: 
provided at least thirty (30%) percent of the registered voters of the Tribe are 
present at such Membership Meeting, as verified by the Election Board.

Notice of a General Membership Meeting shall be given thirty (30) days prior
to the meeting by mail to the last known address of each adult member of 
the Tribe, and by posting in the Tribal Office or Governmental Center.

Section 2, Initiative. Members of the Tribe shall have the power to initiate ordinances 
or repeal or amend existing ordinances in the following manner:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

Initiative petitions shall explain the ordinance to be acted upon in language 
understood by the signatories.

Petitions signed by twenty-five percent (25%) of the registered voters and verified by 
the Election Board shall be presented to the Tribal Council for action.

Upon receipt of a verified petition, the Tribal Council may, within thirty (30) days,
adopt the initiative measure by a majority vote without alteration. If the Tribal 
Council fails to adopt the measure, the Election Board shall call a special election 
for the purpose of allowing the General Membership to vote on the initiative 
measure.

Initiative elections will be held not less than forty-five (45) days after verification 
and not more than ninety (90) days in accordance with applicable provisions of this 
Constitution, any applicable tribal ordinance and any rules and regulations issued 
by the Election Board.

The decision of a majority of the voters in such an initiative election vote shall be 
binding on the Tribal Council, provided that thirty percent (30%) of the registered 
voters cast ballots. If less than thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters of the 
Tribe cast ballots in such election, the initiative shall be deemed defeated.

The right of initiative does not extend beyond the subject of Tribal ordinances and 
may not be utilized to abrogate any rights of the. Tribal Judiciary or abrogate any 
rights guaranteed to any person under Article III, Section 1 of this Constitution.

Section 3. Limitations on Membership Powers. The General Membership shall not have 
the power to take any of the following action under this Article:

(a) 

Propose, adopt or amend the Tribal Budget;

(b) 

Appropriate or expend Tribal revenues or funds;

(c) 

Reverse, overturn or otherwise influence any judicial action of the Tribal Court;

(d) 

Take any action which is otherwise in violation of this Constitution or a usurpation 
of individual rights as defined herein.

Section 4. 

Referendum.

(a) 

(b) 

The Tribal Council shall, upon an affirmative vote of seven (7) Council Members, 
schedule a referendum election on any proposed or previously enacted ordinance 
by the membership.

The referendum election shall be held no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later 
than ninety (90) days from the date the proposed or existing ordinance is referred 
to the voters in accordance with applicable provisions of this Constitution, any 
applicable tribal ordinance and any rules and regulations issued by the Election 
Board. The date of the referendum election shall be set by the Tribal Council.

(c) 

The vote of a majority of those actually voting shall be binding upon the Tribal 
Council, provided at least thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters of the Tribe 
cast ballots in the referendum election.

Section 5. 

Time of Effect or Repeal.

(a) 

(b) 

Any action taken under this Article VII shall take effect ten (10) days after 
certification of election or vote by the Election Board.

Actions taken by the General Membership under this Article VII may only be 
repealed by subsequent action of the General Membership and may not be repealed 
by action of the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS OF THE TRIBE NOT DIMINISHED

 
 Section 1. 
referred to in this Constitution shall not be diminished by this Constitution.

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Tribe but not expressly 

Section 2. 
govern all people subject to the Tribe's jurisdiction.

This Constitution, Tribal ordinances, regulations and Judicial decisions shall 
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTION

 
 Section 1. First Election. The first election under this Constitution of the nine (9) 
members of the Tribal Council and the Tribal Ogema shall be conducted in accordance 
with Article IV. Section 2, Article V, Sections 2 and 4 and this Article and shall be 
conducted no later than one hundred eighty (180) days after this Constitution is adopted. 
The date for the election shall be set by the Election Board appointed under subsection (e) 
of this Section. This election shall be conducted to implement a system of staggered terms 
of service by Tribal Council members and the Tribal Ogema as follows:

(a) Six positions on the Tribal Council will be elected by members residing in the nine 
(9) county district consisting of the Michigan Counties of Kent, Lake, Manistee, 
Mason, Muskegon, Newaygo, Oceana, Ottawa and Wexford. The terms of office for 
such Council members will be decided in the following manner:

1. 

2. 

The three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall each 
serve an approximate four (4) year term of office.

The three (3) candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall 
serve an approximate two (2) year term of office.

(b) Two positions on the Tribal Council shall be elected by all of the members of the 
Tribe regardless of residency. The terms of office for such Council members will be 
decided in the following manner:

1. 

2. 

The candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall serve an 
approximate four (4) year term of office.

The candidate receiving the next highest number of votes shall serve an 
approximate two (2) year term of office.

One position on the Tribal Council shall be elected by those members residing 
outside the nine (9) county district and shall serve an approximate two (2) year term 
of office.

The candidate for the office of Tribal Ogema who receives the majority of votes cast 
shall serve an approximate four (4) year term of office. If no one (1) candidate 
receives a majority of the votes cast, a run-off election shall be held between the two 
(2) candidates who received the highest number of votes.

The Tribal Council in office when this Constitution is adopted shall appoint an 
Election Board consisting of five (5) adult members of the Tribe. Such appointments 
shall be made no later than thirty (30) days after this Constitution is adopted.

The service of the Election Board members appointed to conduct the first election
shall expire immediately upon completion of their duties, in order that the first 
elected Tribal Ogema and Tribal Council may make appointments to the Election 
Board.

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

The Election Board shall issue such rules and regulations, consistent with this 
Constitution, as it deems necessary to properly conduct the first election. Such 
rules and regulations shall be Issued no later than ninety (90) days after 
appointments are made to the Election Board.

(h) 

The Election Board shall register eligible voters of the Tribe and provide for 
conducting the first election.

Section 2. Election Methods.

(a) 

(b) 

Regular Elections. After the first election, members of the Tribal Council and the 
Tribal Ogema shall be elected in the month of April, the date to be set by the 
Election Board. The conduct for all tribal elections, including registration 
requirements, shall be prescribed and provided for by the Election Board.

Special Elections. Special elections shall be called by the Election Board, when 
appropriate or when required under this Constitution, to remove, recall, and fill 
vacancies of elected officials, and to submit initiatives and referenda to the Tribal 
membership.

Section 3. Voting.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Any duly enrolled member of the Little River Band of Ottawa, who is at least 
eighteen (18) years old, and is registered to vote on the date of any given tribal 
election shall be eligible to vote in that tribal election.

Voting in tribal elections shall be by secret ballot cast at polls established by the 
Election Board; Provided however, that the membership may make advisory 
recommendations at General Membership meetings by voice vote or show of hands 
concerning matters to be decided by the Tribal Council.

Absentee voting shall be permitted in accordance with such rules and procedures 
as shall be established by the Election Board.

Each registered voter shall be entitled to cast one (1) vote for each vacancy on the 
Tribal Council in the district(s) in which such voter resides. No more than one (1) 
vote per candidate may be cast. The candidate(s) receiving the highest number of 
votes shall be elected to fill each vacancy according to the rank order of votes 
received. Each registered voter shall be entitled to cast one (1) vote for a candidate 
for the office of Tribal Ogema.

(e) 

In all other elections, a majority of those voting in the election shall constitute 
action by the Tribe and such vote shall be conclusive on the Tribe.

Section 4. Election Board.

(a) 

Subject to the approval of the Tribal Council, the Tribal Ogema shall appoint an 
Election Board consisting of five (5) adult members of the Tribe, to register voters, 

hold elections, certify election results, and settle election disputes other than 
allegations of impropriety by the Election Board.

(b) 

The term of office for an Election Board member shall be four (4) years.

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

Allegations of impropriety by the Election Board shall be settled by the Tribal 
Judiciary.

Tribal members who are holding elected office or running for office shall not be 
eligible to serve as an Election Board member.

The Election Board shall be authorized to issue such rules and procedures as may 
be necessary to carry out tribal elections and to provide for ongoing voter 
registration.

Candidates for tribal office may choose a representative to be present when the 
election ballots are counted by the Election Board.

A Tribal member shall have five (5) business days from the date of the election to 
file an election challenge.
 
 

ARTICLE X - RESIGNATION, RECALL, OR REMOVAL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS

 
 Section 1. Resignation, The Tribal Ogema or any member of the Tribal Council may 
resign from his/her elected position by submitting written notice of resignation to the 
Tribal Council. Such resignation is effective upon receipt by the Tribal Council.

;
!

Section 2. Recall. The registered voters of the Tribe shall have the right to recall the 
Tribal Ogema or any member of the Tribal Council by filing a recall petition with the 
Election Board. The petition must be signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the 
registered voters of the Tribe. Tie Election Board shall verify and approve/deny the 
petition within thirty (30) days of receipt. At least fifty percent (50%) of the verified 
signatures on the petition must be registered voters who are eligible to vote in the election 
of the Tribal Council member now subject to recall.

The Election Board shall conduct a recall election within ninety (90) days of the 
Election Board's verification and approval of the petition and its signatures. If the term 
of office for the Tribal Ogema or Tribal Council member being recalled will end within six 
(6) months of the date the Election Board verifies and approves the recall petition the issue 
will be held until the next regularly scheduled session.

Section 3. Removal. The Tribal Ogema or any member of the Tribal Council may be 
subject to removal by a resolution in favor of removal supported by seven (7) of the nine 
(9) members of the Tribal Council for any of the following reasons;

(a) 

Gross misconduct or malfeasance in office.

(b) 

(c) 

Conviction, while in office, of a felony under Federal, Tribal, or State law, or 
conviction of any other crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.

Inability to fulfill the duties of the office due to mental or physical disability, to the 
extent that he/she is incapable of exercising Judgment about or attending to the 
business of his/her office.

At least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Tribal Council at which the vote for 
removal will be taken, the Tribal Ogema or Tribal Council member, shall be provided with 
a written notice of Tribal Council's intent to vote to remove, which notice shall set forth, 
with specificity, the alleged grounds for removal. Before any vote for removal is taken, the 
Tribal Ogema or Tribal Council member, shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity 
to answer the charges at the public meeting of the Tribal Council, held for that purpose. 
The decision of the Tribal Council shall be final.

Section 4. Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of the Tribal Ogema or on the Tribal 
Council resulting from death, resignation, forfeiture, removal, or recall shall be filled as 
follows:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

If less than eighteen (18) months remain in the term of office for the Tribal Ogema 
or Tribal Council member, an individual shall be appointed to fill such vacant 
position at the next regular Tribal Council meeting, provided such appointment is 
approved by a majority vote of the Tribal Council. The Speaker of the Tribal 
Council shall nominate an individual to fill the vacancy in the Office of the Tribal 
Ogema. The Tribal Ogema shall nominate an individual to fill a vacancy on the 
Tribal Council

If more than eighteen months remain in the term of office for the Tribal Ogema or
a Tribal Council member, a special election shall be held within three (3) months 
after the vacancy occurs. When calling a special election to the fill the vacancy of 
a Tribal Council member, the qualifications for candidates and registered voters 
entitled to participate shall be consistent with those applicable to the District in 
which such vacant seat exists.

Any special election required to be held under this Section shall be conducted in 
accordance with applicable provisions of this Constitution, any applicable tribal 
ordinance and any rules and regulations issued by the Election Board.

The Tribal Ogema or Tribal Council member taking office under the provisions of 
this Section shall only serve until the term of office for the vacant office he/she is 
filling expires.

A vacancy occurring In the position of Speaker or Recorder of the Tribal Council 

shall be filled by majority voter of the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

 
 Section 1. The Tribal Council shall not waive or limit the right of the Little River Band 
to be immune from suit, except as authorized by tribal ordinance or resolution or in 
furtherance of tribal business enterprises. Except as authorized by tribal ordinance or 
resolution, tire provisions of Article III of this Constitution shall not be construed to waive 
or limit the right of the Little River Band to be immune from suit for damages.

Section 2. Suits against the Little River Band in Tribal Courts Authorized.

(a) 

(b) 

The Little River Band, its Tribal Council members, Tribal Ogema, and other Tribal 
officials, acting in their official capacities, shall be subject to suit for declaratory or 
injunctive relief in the Tribal Court system for the purpose of enforcing rights and 
duties established by this Constitution and by the ordinances and resolutions of 
the Tribe.

Notwithstanding the authorization provided in subsection (a) of this Section, 
persons shall not be entitled to an award of damages, as a form of relief, against the 
Tribe, its Tribal Council members, the Tribal Ogema, or other Tribal officials acting 
in their official capacities; provided that the Tribal Council may by ordinance waive 
the right of the Tribe or Tribal officials to be immune from damages in such suits 
only in specified instances when such waiver would promote the best interests of 
the Tribe or the interests of justice.

(c) 

The Tribe, however, by this Article does not waive or limit any rights which it may
have to be immune from suit in the courts of the United States or of any state.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT OF INTEREST

 
 In carrying out the duties of tribal office, no tribal official, elected or appointed, shall make 
or participate in making decisions which involve balancing a personal financial interest, 
other than Interests held in common by all tribal members, against the interests of the 
Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SEVERABILITY

 
 If for any reason any provision of this Constitution shall be held to be invalid or 
unconstitutional by the Tribal Court or any federal court of competent jurisdiction, the 
validity and effect of all other provisions shall not be affected thereby.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters 
of the Little River Band voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative; provided at least thirty percent (30%) of those 
entitled to vote participate in such election.

Section 2. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any 
proposed amendment at the request of the Tribal Council or upon receipt of a petition, 
which has been verified by the Tribe's Election Board, signed by at least thirty percent 
(30%) of the eligible voters of the Little River Band.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Little 
River Band voting at a special election called for such purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative, in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those 
entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his 
approval and shall be effective from the date of his approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs on January 20, 1998 the attached Constitution of the Little River Band of
Ottawa was submitted to the qualified voters of the Little River Band and on 

was duly adopted/rejected by a vote of 553 for and 32
May 27, 1998 
against and 3 cast ballots found spoiled of mutilated in an election in which at 
least 30 percent (30%) of the 833 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in 

accordance with the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended.

Date:

May 27, 1998
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, Hilda a. Manual____________ , Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the
authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Indian Reorganization Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated to me by Secretarial Order No. 3150 
as extended by Secretarial Order No. 3177, as amended, do hereby approve the 
Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa. This Constitution is effective as of this 
date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any 
action under this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Washington, D.C.

Date: JUL 10 1998

Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

