 
  
  
  
 Constitution 
 
OF THE 
 
 Little River Band of Ottawa 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Little River Ottawa people have asserted our sovereignty throughout history 
including in the Treaty of Chicago [August 29, 1821; 7 Stat 218], the Treaty of Washington [March 
28, 1836; 7 Stat 491], and the Treaty of Detroit [July 31, 1855; 11 Stat 621].

Between the last treaty and the present day, the Grand River Ottawa people who became the 
Little River Band of Ottawa Indians were known and organized under several names, including 
members of “Indian Village” on the Manistee River, residents of the Pere Marquette Village or 
“Indian Town”, Unit No. 7 of the Northern Michigan Ottawa Association, the Thornapple River 
Band, and finally the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians.

On September 21, 1994, Public Law 103-324 (108 Stat 2156) was enacted, reaffirming 
federal recognition of and confirming the sovereignty of the Grand River Bands comprising the 
Little River Band of Ottawa Indians (referred to as the Tribe or Little River Band).

As an exercise of our sovereign powers, in order to organize for our common good, to govern 
ourselves under our own laws, to maintain and foster our tribal culture, provide for the welfare and 
prosperity of our people, and to protect our homeland we adopt this constitution, in accordance with 
the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, as amended, as the Little River Band of Ottawa 
Indians.

ARTICLE I. TERRITORY
Section 1 - Territory. The territory of the Little River Band of Ottawa Indians shall encompass all 
lands which are now or hereinafter owned by or reserved for the Tribe, including the Manistee 
Reservation in Manistee County (Michigan), Custer and Eden Townships in Mason County 
(Michigan) and all lands which are now or at a later date owned by the Tribe or held in trust for the 
Tribe or any member of the Tribe by the United States of America.
Section 2 - Jurisdiction Distinguished From Territory. The Tribe’s jurisdiction over its members 
and territory shall be exercised to the fullest extent consistent with this Constitution, the sovereign 
powers of the Tribe, and federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP
 
 Section 1 - Eligibility for Membership. An individual is eligible for membership in the Tribe, if 
he/she possesses at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Indian blood, of which at least one-eighth (1/8) 
degree must be Grand River Ottawa or Michigan Ottawa blood and:

(a) Is a lineal descendant of a member of the historic Grand River Bands who resided in 
Manistee, Mason, Wexford or Lake Counties in the State of Michigan, who was listed on the 
schedule of Grand River Ottawa in the Durant Roll of 1908 as approved by the Secretary of 
the Interior on February 18, 1910; or,
(b) Is a lineal descendant of individuals listed on the 1870 Annuity Payrolls of Chippewas 
and Ottawas of Michigan listed under the following Ottawa Chiefs:
Kewacushkum 
Shaw-be-quo-ung 
Maw-gaw-ne-quong 
(c)  Is not currently enrolled in any other federally recognized Indian Tribe, band, or group.

Me-tay-wis
Kaw-gay-gaw-bowe
Aken Bell; and,

Pay-quo-tush 
Penayse 
Ching-gawa-she 

Section 2 - Membership Rights of Children Who Have Been Adopted. Any child who is less than 
18 years of age, who meets the membership criteria in Section 1, shall be eligible for membership, 
notwithstanding such adoption.
Section 3 - Dual Membership Prohibition. Any member of the Little River Band who applies for 
and is accepted as a member of another federally recognized Indian Tribe or band shall be subject 
to disenrollment in accordance with Section 4 of this Article.
Section 4 - Membership Procedure. The Tribal Council shall establish ordinances governing 
membership, including but not limited to enrollment and disenrollment; Provided that the Tribal 
Council shall not have the power to change or establish substantive requirements for membership 
in addition to those established in this Article.
Section 5 - Right of Appeal. Any person whose application for membership has been denied, or any 
member who has been disenrolled, shall have the right to appeal to the Tribal Court.
 
 

ARTICLE III - CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS
 
 Section 1 - Civil Rights. The Little River Band in exercising the powers of self-government shall 
not:

(a) Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging the 
freedom of speech, or of the press, or of the right of the people peaceably to assemble and 
to petition for a redress of grievances;
(b) Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects 
against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon probable cause, 
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be searched and 
the person or thing to be seized;
(c) Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;
(d) Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;
(e) Take any private property for a public use without just compensation;
(f) Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial, to be 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses 
against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and at his own 
expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;
(g) Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual punishments, 
and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense any penalty or punishment greater 
than imprisonment for a term of one year or a fine of five thousand dollars ($5000.00), or 
both, or the maximum penalty allowed under Federal law;
(h) Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or deprive any 
person of liberty or property without due process of law;
(i) Pass any legislation, directed against a designated person, pronouncing him/her guilty 
of an alleged crime, without trial or conviction or ex post facto law, which retroactively 
changes the legality or consequences of a fact or action after the occurrence of that fact or 
commission of the act;
(j) Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the right, upon 
request, to a trial by jury of not less than six (6) persons;
(k) Make or enforce any law unreasonably infringing the right of tribal members to keep and 
bear arms; or
(l) The enumeration of rights in this Constitution shall not be construed to deny or disparage 
other rights retained by tribal members.

Section 2 - Access to Tribal Records. Subject to any express limitations contained in this 
Constitution, the laws of the United States, and individual Tribal members’ and Tribal employees’ 
rights to privacy, members of the Tribe shall be provided access to review the records of Tribe 
including, but not limited to: minutes of all meetings of the Tribal Council or other subdivisions of 
the Tribal government, Tribal budgets and financial reports of Tribal expenditures; provided that 
such review shall be conducted during normal office hours.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - TRIBAL COUNCIL
 
 Section 1 - The legislative powers of the Little River Band shall be invested in the Tribal Council. 
Section 2 - Composition of the Tribal Council.

(a) The Tribal Council shall consist of nine (9) persons, elected by popular vote of the 
registered voters of the Tribe in the manner described in this Section and Article IX.
(b)Tribal Council positions shall be elected by the membership from the following districts:
1. Six (6) of the nine (9) members of the Tribal Council shall be elected by the 
registered voters of the Tribe who reside in the following Counties in the State of 
Michigan: Kent, Lake, Manistee, Mason, Muskegon, Newago, Oceana, Ottawa and 
Wexford;
2. Two (2) of the nine (9) members of the Tribal Council shall be elected by all of 
the registered voters of the Tribe;
3. One (1) of the nine (9) members of the Tribal Council shall be elected by those 
registered voters of the Tribe residing outside the nine (9) county district defined in 
subsection 2(b)(1) of this Section.

(c) The Council shall select two (2) Council members, by majority vote of the Council, to 
serve as Council Officers: Speaker and Recorder. Officers terms shall be two years. A single 
Council member may not hold both Officer positions.

Section 3 - Qualifications. Any member of the Tribe who is twenty-one (21) years of age or older 
who has resided within the State of Michigan for at least six (6) months prior to the date of the next 
scheduled election may serve on the Tribal Council.
Section 4 - Terms of Office.

(a) Except as provided for in Section 1 of Article IX in this Constitution each Tribal Council 
member’s term of office shall be four (4) years.
(b) Tribal Council members shall continue in office until their successors are sworn in by 
the Tribal Court, their office is deemed vacant, or they are removed from the Tribal Council. 
(c) If any Tribal Council member ceases to be a member of the Tribe, he or she shall 
automatically forfeit his or her Council position.
(d) If any Tribal Council member ceases to be a resident of the State of Michigan, he or she 
shall automatically forfeit his or her Council position.
(e) There shall be no prohibition against continuous service.

Section 5 - Council Officers Duties.

(a) Speaker. The Speaker of the Council shall:

1. Preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council.
2. Call special meetings of the Council, when appropriate.
3. Receive reports from the committees or commissions and deliver such reports to 
the Council.
4. Perform the duties of the Tribal Ogema in the absence of or due to the inability 
of the Ogema to perform those duties.

(b)  Recorder. The Recorder of the Council shall:

1. Submit a record of the minutes of all Tribal Council meetings, and make such 
reports available to the membership of the Tribe.
2. Keep the Members informed as to the status of the activities of the Council and 
all other matters affecting the Tribe and its members.
3. Maintain and protect the Tribal Seal.
4. Perform the duties of the Speaker if the Speaker is absent or unable to fulfill those 
duties.

Section 6 - Meetings of the Tribal Council.

(a) Regular Meetings. The Tribal Council shall meet in regular session at least once every 
month at a time and place to be set by the Tribal Council. The schedule of meetings for 
regular sessions of the Tribal Council for the next calendar year shall be set by resolution 
of the Tribal Council at the last regular session of each calendar year. The meeting schedule 
for each calendar year shall be published and made available to the General Membership.
(b) Special Meetings. A special meeting of the Tribal Council may be held under the 
following conditions:

1. A special meeting shall be called (i) upon written request of the Tribal Ogema 
submitted to the Council Recorder, (ii) upon written request, submitted to the Tribal 
Ogema or Council Recorder, by two (2) members of the Tribal Council, (iii) upon 
written request, submitted to the Tribal Ogema or Council Recorder, signed by at 
least ten percent (10%) of the Tribal Elders, fifty-five (55) years or older; or (iv) 
upon a petition of ten percent (10%) of the registered Tribal voters requesting a 
meeting submitted to the Tribal Ogema or Council Recorder.
2. There shall be at least seventy-two (72) hours written notice sent to the Council 
members at each member’s designated regular mailing address. Notice shall also be 
posted in the Tribal Office or Governmental Center. No business may be transacted 
if proper notices have not been mailed and posted. The notice shall specify all 
business to be addressed, and no matter which is not included in the notice may be 
addressed at the meeting.

(c) Emergency Meetings. Emergency meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the 
Tribal Ogema or Speaker upon less than seventy-two (72) hours written notice, if such 
meetings are necessary for the preservation or protection of the health, welfare, peace, safety 
or property of the Tribe. Efforts shall be made to ensure that each Tribal Council member 
receives notice of such meetings. Where practical, notice shall be posted at the Tribal Office 
or Governmental Center. Notices shall state the purpose, time and place of the meeting. No 
business other than that stated in the notice shall be transacted at such meetings.
(d) Open Meetings; Closed Sessions. All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be open to 
the Tribal Membership. However, the Council may meet in closed session for the following 
purposes:

1. Personnel Matters, provided the employee in question did not request a public 
meeting, or
2. Business matters involving consideration of bids or contracts which are privileged 
or confidential, or
3. Claims by and against the Tribe.

Minutes shall be maintained relating to all business conducted in open or closed session. The 
general reason for a determination to meet in closed session shall placed on the record in open 

session. The minutes of business conducted in closed session shall be maintained in a closed file in 
perpetuity; however, such minutes of closed sessions may be opened to the public upon a vote of 
the majority of the Tribal Council, upon final disposition of the matter concerned or upon order of 
the Tribal Judiciary. Upon conclusion of a closed session, announcement of the resumption of open 
session shall be made before adjournment.

(e) Rules of the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall determine its own rules of 
procedure for meetings of the Tribal Council, subject to any limitations imposed in this 
Constitution. Such rules and procedures shall provide for an opportunity for the General 
Membership to be heard on any question under consideration by the Tribal Council.
(f) Quorum required to conduct business.

1. A quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of six (6) members, provided at least 
four (4) of the six (6) members present represent the nine (9) county district defined 
in subsection 2(b)(1) of Article IV.
2. When a Council Member has a personal interest in an issue or matter to be voted 
on by the Council, other than those common to all Tribal Members, which would 
require balancing personal interest against interests of the Tribe, such member shall 
abstain from voting on that matter due to conflict of interest and shall disclose the 
nature of the conflict.
3. The fact that a member may not vote on an issue due to conflict of interest shall 
not prevent that member from voting on other matters or from determining a 
quorum’s existence.
4. Failure to disclose a potential conflict of interest is cause for removal, and where 
a matter of potential conflict has been disclosed, the Council shall determine by 
majority vote whether a member shall abstain from voting, although no member shall 
be compelled to vote regarding an issue as to which he or she believes a conflict 
exists.

(g) Action by the Tribal Council.

1. The Tribal Council shall act only by ordinance, resolution or motion.
2. Tribal Council action shall be determined by a majority of the quorum present and 
voting at the meeting, unless otherwise specified in this Constitution, and minutes 
shall identify each Council Member’s vote on every issue.

Section 7 - Powers of the Tribal Council. The legislative powers of the Little River Band of Ottawa 
Indians shall be vested in the Tribal Council, subject to any express limitations contained in this 
Constitution. The Tribal Council shall have the power, including by way of illustration, but not by 
limitation:

(a) To exercise the inherent powers of the Little River Band by establishing laws through 
the enactment of ordinances and adoption of resolutions not inconsistent with this 
Constitution:

1. to govern the conduct of members of the Little River Band and other persons 
within its jurisdiction;
2. to promote, protect and provide for public health, peace, morals, education and 
general welfare of the Little River Band and its members;
3. to provide by ordinance for the jurisdiction of the Tribe over Indian Child Welfare 
matters, and all other domestic relations matters;
4. to provide for the manner of making, holding and revoking assignments of the 
Little River Band’s land or interests therein;

(b) To authorize and ratify agreements and contracts negotiated by the Tribal Ogema on 
behalf of the Little River Band with federal, state and local governments and other Indian 
tribes or their departments or political subdivisions, or with private persons on all matters 
within the authority of the Tribal Council;
(c) To purchase, lease, take by gift, take by devise or bequest, or otherwise acquire land, 
interests in land, personal property or other assets which may be deemed beneficial to the 
Little River Band;
(d) To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of Little River Band 
land, interests in land, personal property or other assets;
(e) To employ legal counsel, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior so long 
as such approval is required by Federal law;
(f) To create by ordinance regulatory commissions or subordinate organizations and to 
delegate to such organizations the power to manage the affairs and enterprises of the Little 
River Band, provided that no such commission or subordinate organization shall exercise 
powers of the Tribal Council unless they are expressly delegated by the Tribal Council;
(g) To establish rules and procedures to regulate all meetings of the Tribal Council, standing 
committees, special committees and such other regulatory commissions or subordinate 
organizations created by ordinance;
(h) To approve appointments to the Tribal Court, regulatory commissions and heads of 
subordinate organizations created by ordinance;
(i) To exercise the following fiscal powers:

1. Subject to the veto of the Tribal Ogema, to adopt, approve or amend the annual 
budget presented by the Tribal Ogema and to authorize the expenditure of funds in 
accordance with such budgets;
2. To manage any funds within the exclusive control of the Little River Band and 
to appropriate these funds for the benefit of the Tribe and its members. All 
expenditures of funds shall be pursuant to appropriations or budgets authorized by 
resolution or in accordance with ordinances of the Tribal Council;
3. To levy duties, fees, taxes and assessments on any person, natural or corporate, 
residing or doing business within the territorial jurisdiction of the Little River Band;
4. To borrow money or to issue temporary or long term evidence of indebtedness for 
public purposes and to secure the repayment thereof;

(j) To take action, not inconsistent with this Constitution or Federal law, which shall be 
necessary and proper to carry out the sovereign legislative powers of the Tribe.

Section 10 - Tribal Powers and Rights Not Limited.

(a) Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Little River Band but not expressly 
referred to in this Constitution shall not be diminished, abridged, or divested by this Article.
(b) The Tribal Council may exercise such additional powers as may be conferred upon the 
Tribe in the future by law, by the Secretary of the Interior, or by any other duly authorized 
official or agency of the federal government, state or local government, or by another Indian 
tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE V - TRIBAL OGEMA
 
 Section 1 - The Executive powers of the Little River Band shall be invested in the Tribal Ogema. 
Section 2 - Qualifications. Any member of the Tribe who is twenty-five (25) years of age or older, 
who has resided within the nine (9) county district defined in subsection 2(b)(1) of Article IV, for 

at least six (6) months prior to the date of the next scheduled election may serve as Tribal Ogema. 
Section 3 - Term of Office.

(a) The Tribal Ogema’s term of office shall be four (4) years.
(b) The Tribal Ogema will continue in office until his/her successor is sworn in by the 
Tribal Court, the office is deemed vacant, or he/she is removed as the Tribal Ogema.
(c) If the Ogema ceases to be a member of the Tribe, he/she will automatically forfeit the 
Ogema position.
(d) If the Ogema ceases to reside in the nine (9) county district defined in subsection 2(b)(1) 
of Article IV, he/she will automatically forfeit the Ogema position.
(e) There shall be no prohibition against continuous service.

Section 4 - Election of the Tribal Ogema. The Tribal Ogema shall be the candidate seeking the 
office who receives a majority of the tribal vote cast for that position. If no one (1) candidate 
receives a majority of the votes cast, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) highest vote 
recipients.
Section 5 - Powers of the Ogema.

(a) Subject to any limitations contained in this Constitution, the Tribal Ogema of the Little 
River Band shall be invested with the executive powers of its inherent sovereignty including, 
but not limited to:

1. To enforce and execute the laws, ordinances and resolutions of the Tribal 
Council, consistent with this Constitution.
2. To oversee the administration and management of the Tribal government in 
accordance with the laws, resolutions, and motions adopted by the Tribal Council.
3. To consult, negotiate, and execute agreements and contracts on behalf of the 
Little River Band with federal, state, and local governments and other tribal 
governments, or with private persons or organizations. Agreements and contracts 
reached must be approved or ratified by Tribal Council to be effective.
4. With the approval of the Tribal Council, to appoint members to the Tribal Court, 
members of all regulatory commissions, and heads of subordinate organizations 
created by ordinance (Art. IV, Sec. 9(h)).
5. Timely prepare and present the annual Tribal Budget to the Tribal Council for 
approval or other action and to keep the Tribal Council fully advised as to the 
financial condition and needs of the Tribe, preparing monthly reports for the Council, 
and making quarterly reports available to the membership.
6. To have veto power over actions of the Tribal Council modifying the Tribal 
Budget or appropriations items as provided in subsection (c) of this Section 5.
7. To collect taxes or assessments against members, non-members and businesses.
8. To manage the economic affairs, enterprises, property (both real and personal) 
and other interests of the Tribe, consistent with ordinances and resolutions enacted 
by the Tribal Council.
9. To exclude from the lands of the Tribe persons, or other entities, not legally 
entitled to be present thereon.

(b) The Tribal Ogema shall receive for his/her services a compensation to be established by 
the Tribal Council, which shall not be diminished during his/her continuance in office.
(c) Every action taken by the Tribal Council, whether by ordinance, resolution or 
appropriation, which modifies the Tribal Budget submitted for approval by the Tribal 
Ogema, shall be presented to the Tribal Ogema for his/her approval and signature before it 

becomes effective. The Tribal Ogema shall approve or disapprove of the action taken by the 
Tribal Council within seven (7) days after the item is submitted to the Tribal Ogema by the 
Tribal Council. If he/she disapproves of the action taken by the Tribal Council, he shall 
return it to the Tribal Council within the seven (7) days provided, specifying his/her 
objections. If after re-consideration, it again passes the Tribal Council by an affirmative 
vote of six (6) of the nine (9) Tribal Council members, it shall become law and he/she shall 
sign it notwithstanding his/her objections.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL COURT
 
 Section 1 - The judicial power of the Little River Band shall be invested in a Tribal judiciary, which 
shall consist of the Tribal Court, a Court of Appeals, and such inferior courts as the Tribal Council 
may from time to time ordain and establish.
Section 2 - Qualifications.

(a) Member of the Tribe. Any member of Tribe may serve as a Tribal Judge provided 
he/she is twenty-five (25) years of age or older, is not a member of the Tribal Council or 
running for a seat on the Tribal Council, and has not been convicted of any crime of 
dishonesty, or moral turpitude, nor been convicted of a felony under Tribal, or State law 
within the seven (7) year period immediately preceding the date of the election, or, in the 
event of a vacancy under Article X, Section 4(a), his/her appointment.
(b) Non-Member Qualifications. A non-member of the Tribe may be appointed to or elected 
to serve as a Tribal judge if such individual possesses a Law degree and has practiced in 
Federal Indian law or as a tribal judge, and has not been convicted of any crime involving 
dishonesty, moral turpitude, nor been convicted of a felony under Federal, Tribal or State 
law within the seven (7) year period immediately preceding the date of the election, or, in 
the event of a vacancy under Article X, Section 4(a), his/her appointment.

Section 3 - Composition of the Tribal Court System.

(a) Tribal Court. The Tribal Court shall be a court of general jurisdiction and shall consist 
of one (1) judge and one (1) associate judge who shall meet as often as circumstances 
require.
(b) Court of Appeals. The Tribal Court of Appeals shall consist of three (3) judges. At least 
one (1) of the three (3) judges shall be an elder (age 55 years or older) in the Tribe, and at 
least one (1) of the three (3) judges shall be an attorney licensed to practice before the courts 
of a state in the United States.
Section 4 - Appointment and Compensation.

(a) Judges of the Tribal Court, including the Court of Appeals, shall be elected by the 
registered voters.

1. Current Judges. The current tribal judges as of adoption of these amendments 
shall identify the following:

A. Tribal Court judges shall determine staggered terms from amongst 
themselves and new terms shall be set at either two year or four years. Each 
term thereafter shall be set as set forth in Section 5(a).
B. Court of Appeals judges shall determine staggered terms from amongst 
themselves and new terms shall be set at either two years or four years. Each 
term thereafter shall be as set forth in Section 5(a).

2. Declaration of Tribal Court or Court of Appeals Candidacy. Candidates shall 
declare their intention to run for a position on the Tribal Court or the Court of

Appeals. Provided that, the Election Board shall identify positions on the Court of 
Appeals requiring specific qualifications as identified in Section 3(b). Where no 
candidate, at the conclusion of any deadlines set by the Election Board, declares for 
a position on the Court of Appeals requiring specific qualifications, the Tribal 
Ogema shall appoint, and the Tribal Council shall approve a judge for that vacancy.
(b) Compensation. The Tribal Council shall have the power to establish the level of 
compensation for each judge; provided that the compensation due to each individual judge 
shall not be diminished during the term of his/her appointment.
(c) Tribal Judges shall be sworn in by the Speaker of the Tribal Council.

Section 5 - Term of Office.

(a) Except as provided for in Section 6 of this Article VI, the term of office for all Tribal 
Judges shall be six (6) years.
(b) Tribal Judges will continue in office until a successor is sworn in.
(c) There shall be no prohibition against continuous service.

Section 6 - Resignation or Removal.

(a) Resignation. A Tribal Judge may resign his/her office at any time. Resignation is 
immediate upon a Judge submitting written notice to the Tribal Council of his/her 
resignation.
(b) Removal. A Tribal Judge may only be removed by a vote of seven (7) of the nine (9) 
Council Members following a recommendation of removal by a majority of the remaining 
Tribal Judges for the following reasons:

1. Unethical conduct, as defined by the Michigan Indian Judicial Association Model 
Code of Tribal Judicial Conduct;
2. Gross misconduct or malfeasance in office that is clearly prejudicial to the 
administration of justice;
3. Ineligibility, under Section 2 of this Article, to serve as a member of the Tribal 
Court;
4. Inability to fulfill the duties of the office due to mental or physical disability, to 
the extent that he or she is incapable of exercising judgment about or attending to the 
duties of the Tribal Court. Such determination shall be based upon or supported by 
competent medical evidence or opinion.

If a member of the Tribal judiciary obtains information which indicates that grounds exist for 
removal of another judge, he/she shall provide written notice of the charge and specify the facts 
supporting such charge to all Tribal Judges, including the accused. The Judge so charged shall be 
notified so he/she may answer the charges at a public hearing of all members of the Tribal Court 
held for that purpose. Such hearing shall be noticed at least ten (10) days prior to the hearing at 
which the Judge’s referral for removal is to be considered. If a majority of the remaining of the 
Tribal Court vote to refer the Judge to the Tribal Council for removal, the grounds for removal shall 
be set forth with specificity and the Tribal Judge shall be suspended from office until the Tribal 
Council acts on the referral at a public meeting of the Tribal Council held to consider that referral. 
At least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Tribal Council at which the vote for removal will 
be taken, the affected judge shall be provided with a written notice of that meeting. Before any vote 
for removal is taken, the affected judge shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to answer 
the charges at the Tribal Council meeting. If the Tribal Council, by affirmative vote of seven (7) 
of the nine (9) Council members, finds that grounds for removal as stated by the Tribal Court exist, 
the Tribal Council shall remove the judge from office. If the Tribal Council find that the grounds

for removal do not exist, the suspended judge shall be fully reinstated to the Tribal Court.
Section 7 - Vacancy. A vacancy in any Judicial position resulting from a Judge’s death, resignation, 
removal, or recall shall be filled in the same manner as set forth in Article X, Section 4. The term 
of office for any Tribal Judge appointed under this Section shall be for the remainder of the vacant 
term.
Section 8 - Powers of the Tribal Court

(a) The judicial powers of the Little River Band shall extend to all cases and matters in law 
and equity arising under this Constitution, the laws and ordinances of or applicable to the 
Little River Band including but not limited to:

1. To adjudicate all civil and criminal matters arising within the jurisdiction of the 
Tribe or to which the Tribe or an enrolled member of the Tribe is a party.
2. To review ordinances and resolutions of the Tribal Council or General 
Membership to ensure they are consistent with this Constitution and rule void those 
ordinances and resolutions deemed inconsistent with this Constitution.
3. Hear cases based on ordinances and laws of the Tribe for purpose of determining 
innocence or guilt where trial by jury has been waived.
4. Assign fines and penalties as allowed for violations of Tribal law, as allowed by 
Tribal and Federal Law.
5. Grant warrants for search to enforcement officers when just cause is shown.
6. Grant warrants, writs, injunctions and orders no inconsistent with this 
Constitution.
7. Swear in Tribal Council members and the Tribal Ogema by administering the 
oath of office;
8. Establish, by general rules, the practice and procedures for all courts of the Little 
River Band.

Section 9 - Judicial Independence. The Tribal Judiciary shall be independent from the legislative 
and executive functions of the tribal government and no person exercising powers of the legislative 
or executive functions of government shall exercise powers properly belonging to the judicial branch 
of government; provided that the Tribal Council shall be empowered to function as the Tribal Court 
of the Little River Band until the judges prescribed by this Article have been appointed; provided 
further that the first Tribal Council and Tribal Ogema elected under this Constitution shall make 
appointments to its courts within ninety (90) days after its members are elected.

Section 1. General Membership Meetings.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - GENERAL MEMBERSHIP POWERS

 
 (a) Meetings of the General Membership of the Little River Band shall be held twice a year; 
once in the spring, once in the fall, at a site suitable for such a meeting.

1. The chairperson for these meetings shall be the Tribal Ogema, who will officiate 
at these meetings.
2. At these meetings the membership will be informed as to the affairs and “state of 
the Tribe”.
3. Subject to the express limitations contained in this Constitution, motions and 
ordinances adopted by the General Membership shall have the status of law and be 
binding on the Tribal Council, Tribal Ogema and Judiciary; provided at least thirty 
(30%) percent of the registered voters of the Tribe are present at such Membership 
Meeting, as verified by the Election Board.

4. Notice of a General Membership Meeting shall be given thirty (30) days prior to 
the meeting by mail to the last known address of each adult member of the Tribe, and 
by posting in the Tribal Office or Governmental Center.

Section 2 - Initiative. Members of the Tribe shall have the power to initiate ordinances or repeal or 
amend existing ordinances in the following manner:

a. Initiative petitions shall explain the ordinance to be acted upon in language understood 
by the signatories.
b. Petitions signed by twenty-five percent (25%) of the registered voters and verified by the 
Election Board shall be presented to the Tribal Council for action.
c. Upon receipt of a verified petition, the Tribal Council may, within thirty (30) days, adopt 
the initiative measure by a majority vote without alteration. If the Tribal Council fails to 
adopt the measure, the Election Board shall call a special election for the purpose of 
allowing the General Membership to vote on the initiative measure.
d. Initiative elections will be held not less than forty-five (45) days after verification and not 
more than ninety (90) days in accordance with applicable provisions of this Constitution, any 
applicable tribal ordinance and any rules and regulations issued by the Election Board.
e. The decision of a majority of the voters in such an initiative election vote shall be binding 
on the Tribal Council, provided that thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters cast ballots. 
If less than thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters of the Tribe cast ballots in such 
election, the initiative shall be deemed defeated.
f. The right of initiative does not extend beyond the subject of Tribal ordinances and may 
not be utilized to abrogate any rights of the Tribal judiciary or abrogate any rights 
guaranteed to any person under Article III, Section 1 of this Constitution.

Section 3 - Limitations on Membership Powers. The General Membership shall not have the power 
to take any of the following action under this Article:

(a) Propose, adopt or amend the Tribal Budget;
(b) Appropriate or expend Tribal revenues or funds;
(c) Reverse, overturn or otherwise influence any judicial action of the Tribal Court;
(d) Take any action which is otherwise in violation of this Constitution or a usurpation of 
individual rights as defined herein.

Section 4 - Referendum.

(a) The Tribal Council shall, upon an affirmative vote of seven (7) Council Members, 
schedule a referendum election on any proposed or previously enacted ordinance by the 
membership.
(b) The referendum election shall be held no sooner than thirty (30) days and no later than 
ninety (90) days from the date the proposed or existing ordinance is referred to the voters 
in accordance with applicable provisions of this Constitution, any applicable tribal ordinance 
and any rules and regulations issued by the Election Board. The date of the referendum 
election shall be set by the Tribal Council.
(c) The vote of a majority of those actually voting shall be binding upon the Tribal Council, 
provided at least thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters of the Tribe cast ballots in the 
referendum election.
Section 5 - Time of Effect or Repeal.

(a) Any action taken under this Article VII shall take effect ten (10) days after certification 
of election or vote by the Election Board.
(b) Actions taken by the General Membership under this Article VII may only be repealed 

by subsequent action of the General Membership and may not be repealed by action of the 
Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS OF THE TRIBE NOT DIMINISHED
 
 Section 1 - Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Tribe but not expressly referred to in this 
Constitution shall not be diminished by this Constitution.
Section 2 - This Constitution, Tribal ordinances, regulations and judicial decisions shall govern all 
people subject to the Tribe’s jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTION
 
 Section 1 - First Election. The first election under this Constitution of the nine (9) members of the 
Tribal Council and the Tribal Ogema shall be conducted in accordance with Article IV, Section 2, 
Article V, Section 6 and this Article and shall be conducted no later than one hundred eighty (180) 
days after this Constitution is adopted. The date for the election shall be set by the Election Board 
appointed under subsection (e) of this Section. This election shall be conducted to implement a 
system of staggered terms of service by Tribal Council members and the Tribal Ogema as follows:
(a) Six positions on the Tribal Council will be elected by members residing in the nine (9) 
county district consisting of the Michigan Counties of Kent, Lake, Manistee, Mason, 
Muskegon, Newaygo, Oceana, Ottawa and Wexford. The terms of office for such Council 
members will be decided in the following manner:

1. The three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall each serve 
an approximate four (4) year term of office.
2. The three (3) candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall serve 
an approximate two (2) year term of office.

(b) Two positions on the Tribal Council shall be elected by all of the members of the Tribe 
regardless of residency. The terms of office for such Council members will be decided in the 
following manner:

1. The candidate receiving the highest number of votes shall serve an approximate 
four (4) year term of office.
2. The candidate receiving the next highest number of votes shall serve an 
approximate two (2) year term of office.

(c) One position on the Tribal Council shall elected by those members residing outside the 
nine (9) county district and shall serve an approximate two (2) year term of office.
(d) The candidate for the office of Tribal Ogema who receives the majority of votes cast 
shall serve an approximate four (4) year term of office. If no one (1) candidate receives a 
majority of the votes cast, a run-off election shall be held between the two (2) candidates 
who received the highest number of votes.
(e) The Tribal Council in office when this Constitution is adopted shall appoint an Election 
Board consisting of five (5) adult members of the Tribe. Such appointments shall be made 
no later than thirty (30) days after this Constitution is adopted.
(f) The service of the Election Board members appointed to conduct the first election shall 
expire immediately upon completion of their duties, in order that the first-elected Tribal 
Ogema and Tribal Council may make appointments to the Election Board.
(g) The Election Board shall issue such rules and regulations, consistent with this 
Constitution, as it deems necessary to properly conduct the first election. Such rules and 
regulations shall be issued no later than ninety (90) days after appointments are made to the

Election Board.
(h) The Election Board shall register eligible voters of the Tribe and provide for conducting 
the first election.
Section 2 - Election Methods.

(a) Regular Elections. After the first election, members of the Tribal Council and the Tribal 
Ogema shall be elected in the month of April, the date to be set by the Election Board. The 
conduct for all tribal elections, including registration requirements, shall be prescribed and 
provided for by the Election Board.
(b) Special Elections. Special elections shall be called by the Election Board, when 
appropriate or when required under this Constitution, to remove, recall, and fill vacancies 
of elected officials, and to submit initiatives and referenda to the Tribal membership.

Section 3 - Voting.

(a) Any duly enrolled member of the Little River Band of Ottawa, who is at least eighteen 
(18) years old, and is registered to vote on the date of any given tribal election shall be 
eligible to vote in that tribal election.
(b) Voting in tribal elections shall be by secret ballot cast at polls established by the Election 
Board; Provided however, that the membership may make advisory recommendations at 
General Membership meetings by voice vote or show of hands concerning matters to be 
decided by the Tribal Council.
(c) Absentee voting shall be permitted in accordance with such rules and procedures as shall 
be established by the Election Board.
(d) Each registered voter shall be entitled to cast one (1) vote for each vacancy on the Tribal 
Council in the district(s) in which such voter resides. No more than one (1) vote per 
candidate may be cast. The candidate(s) receiving the highest number of votes shall be 
elected to fill each vacancy according to the rank order of votes received. Each registered 
voter shall be entitled to cast one (1) vote for a candidate for the office of Tribal Ogema.
(e) In all other elections, a majority of those voting in the election shall constitute action by 
the Tribe and such vote shall be conclusive on the Tribe.

Section 4 - Election Board.

(a) The Election Board shall consist of five members to be elected by the registered voters.
1. First Election of Members. The first election shall be conducted by the Election 
Board currently seated and their terms of office shall be concluded when the newly 
elected Election Board members are sworn into office.
2. First Election Date. The first such election shall be conducted during the next 
general election of the Tribe.
3. Staggered Terms. Election Board candidates elected to these positions shall serve 
as follows:

A. The three (3) candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall serve 
a four-year term of office.
B. The two (2) candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall 
serve a two-year term of office, and the term shall thereafter be as set forth 
in subsection (b).

(b) The term of office for an Election Board member shall be four (4) years.
(c) Allegations of impropriety by the Election Board shall be settled by the Tribal Judiciary.
(d) Tribal members who are holding elected office, or running for office, shall not be 
eligible to serve as an Election Board member.

(e) The Election Board shall be authorized to issue such rules and procedures as may be 
necessary to carry out tribal elections and to provide for ongoing voter registration.
(f) Candidates for tribal office may choose a representative to be present when the election 
ballots are counted by the Election Board.
(g) A Tribal member shall have five (5) business days from the date of the election to file 
an election challenge.
(h) A vacancy in any Election Board position resulting from death, resignation, removal, or 
recall shall be filled in the manner as set forth in Article X. Section 4.
 
 

ARTICLE X - RESIGNATION, RECALL, OR REMOVAL OF ELECTED OFFICIALS
 
 Section 1- Resignation. The Tribal Ogema or any member of the Tribal Council may resign from 
his/her elected position by submitting written notice of resignation to the Tribal Council. Such 
resignation is effective upon receipt by the Tribal Council.
Section 2 - Recall. The registered voters of the Tribe shall have the right to recall the Tribal Ogema, 
any member of the Tribal Council, or a Tribal Judge or Appellate Judge by filing a recall petition 
with the Election Board. The petition must be signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the 
registered voters of the Tribe. The Election Board shall verify and approved/deny the petition within 
thirty (30) days of receipt. At least fifty percent (50%) of the verified signatures on the petition must 
be registered voters who are eligible to vote in the election of the Tribal Council member now 
subject to recall.

The Election Board shall conduct a recall election within ninety (90) days of the Election 
Board’s verification and approval of the petition and its signatures. If the term of office for the 
Tribal Ogema or Tribal Council member being recalled will end within six (6) months of the date 
the Election Board verifies and approves the recall petition the issue will be held until the next 
regularly scheduled session.
Section 3 - Removal. The Tribal Ogema or any member of the Tribal Council may be subject to 
removal by a resolution in favor of removal supported by seven (7) of the nine (9) members of the 
Tribal Council for any of the following reasons:

(a) Gross misconduct or malfeasance in office.
(b) Conviction, while in office, of a felony under Federal, Tribal, or State law, or conviction 
of any other crime involving dishonesty or moral turpitude.
(c) Inability to fulfill the duties of the office due to mental or physical disability, to the 
extent that he/she is incapable of exercising judgment about or attending to the business of 
his/her office.

At least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Tribal Council at which the vote for removal will 
be taken, the Tribal Ogema or Tribal Council member, shall be provided with a written notice of 
Tribal Council’s intent to vote to remove, which notice shall set forth, with specificity, the alleged 
grounds for removal. Before any vote for removal is taken, the Tribal Ogema or Tribal Council 
member, shall be provided with a reasonable opportunity to answer the charges at the public meeting 
of the Tribal Council, held for that purpose. The decision of the Tribal Council shall be final.
Section 4 - Vacancies. A vacancy in the office of an elected official resulting from death, 
resignation, forfeiture, removal, or recall shall be filled as follows:

(a) If less than eighteen (18) months remain in the term of office of an elected official, an 
individual shall be appointed to fill such vacant position at the next regular Tribal Council 
meeting, provided such appointment is approved by a majority vote of the Tribal Council. 
The Speaker of the Tribal Council shall nominate an individual to fill the vacancy in the 

Office of the Tribal Ogema. The Tribal Ogema shall nominate an individual to fill any other 
vacancy of an elected official.
(b) If more than eighteen months remain in the term of office of an elected official, a special 
election shall be held within three (3) months after the vacancy occurs. When calling a 
special election to the fill the vacancy of a Tribal Council member, the qualifications for 
candidates and registered voters entitled to participate shall be consistent with those 
applicable to the District in which such vacant seat exists and in regards to any other office 
the individual must meet the qualifications required in the vacant position.
(c) Any special election required to be held under this Section shall be conducted in 
accordance with applicable provisions of this Constitution, any applicable tribal ordinance 
and any rules and regulations issued by the Election Board.
(d) The elected official taking office under the provisions of this Section shall only serve 
until the term of office for the vacant office he/she is filling expires.

A vacancy occurring in the position of Speaker or Recorder of the Tribal Council shall be filled by 
majority voter of the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY
 
 Section 1 - The Tribal Council shall not waive or limit the right of the Little River Band to be 
immune from suit, except as authorized by tribal ordinance or resolution or in furtherance of tribal 
business enterprises. Except as authorized by tribal ordinance or resolution, the provisions of Article 
III of this Constitution shall not be construed to waive or limit the right of the Little River Band to 
be immune from suit for damages.
Section 2 - Suits against the Little River Band in Tribal Courts Authorized.

(a) The Little River Band, its Tribal Council members, Tribal Ogema, and other Tribal 
officials, acting in their official capacities, shall be subject to suit for declaratory or 
injunctive relief in the Tribal Court system for the purpose of enforcing rights and duties 
established by this Constitution and by the ordinances and resolutions of the Tribe.
(b) Notwithstanding the authorization provided in subsection (a) of this Section, persons 
shall not be entitled to an award of damages, as a form of relief, against the Tribe, its Tribal 
Council members, the Tribal Ogema, or other Tribal officials acting in their official 
capacities; provided that the Tribal Council may by ordinance waive the right of the Tribe 
or Tribal officials to be immune from damages in such suits only in specified instances when 
such waiver would promote the best interests of the Band or the interests of justice.
(c) The Tribe, however, by this Article does not waive or limit any rights which it may have 
to be immune from suit in the courts of the United States or of any state.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - CONFLICT OF INTEREST
 
 In carrying out the duties of tribal office, no tribal official, elected or appointed, shall make or 
participate in making decisions which involve balancing a personal financial interest, other than 
interests held in common by all tribal members, against the interests of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SEVERABILITY
 
 If for any reason any provision of this Constitution shall be held to be invalid or unconstitutional by 
the Tribal Court or any federal court of competent jurisdiction, the validity and effect of all other 
provisions shall not be affected thereby.

ARTICLE XIV. AMENDMENTS
Section 1 - This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Little 
River Band voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior or his 
authorized representative; provided at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote participate 
in such election.
Section 2 - It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed 
amendment at the request of the Tribal Council or upon receipt of a petition, which has been verified 
by the Tribe’s Election Board, signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters of the 
Little River Band.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - ADOPTION
 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Little River Band 
voting at a special election called for such purpose by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative, in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be 
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval and shall be effective from the date of his 
approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION
 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs on 
January 20, 1998, the attached Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa was submitted to the 
qualified voters of the Little River Band and on May 27, 1998, was duly adopted/rejected by a vote 
of 553 for and 32 against and 3 cast ballots found spoiled of mutilated in an election in which at least 
30 percent (30%) of the 833 members entitled to vote, cast their ballots in accordance with the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.
/s/ Anne E. Bolton 
Chairman, Election Board 

/s/ Diane S. Lonn
Member, Election Board

/s/ Robert E. Hardenburgh 
Member, Election Board

/s/ Jonnie J. Sam II
Member, Election Board

Date: May 27, 1998

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION (2004 AMENDMENTS)
Pursuant to an order issued by Larry Morrin, Midwest Regional Director, on October 27, 2003, this 
Proposed Amendment “A” was submitted to the qualified voters of the Little River Band of Ottawa 
on April 26, 2004, and was duly adopted/rejected by a vote of 379 for, and 92 against, and 5 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 997 
entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Pursuant to an order issued by Larry Morrin, Midwest Regional Director, on October 27, 2003, this 
Proposed Amendment “B” was submitted to the qualified voters of the Little River Band of Ottawa 
on April 26, 2004, and was duly adopted/rej ected by a vote of 375 for, and 94 against, and 7 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 997 
entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Pursuant to an order issued by Larry Morrin, Midwest Regional Director, on October 27, 2003, this 
Proposed Amendment “C” was submitted to the qualified voters of the Little River Band of Ottawa 
on April 26, 2004, and was duly adopted/rejected by a vote of 378 for, and 90 against, and 8 cast 
ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 997 
entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Gerald F. Parrish 
Chairman, Election Board 

Date: April 26, 2004

John Ross
David Lilliberg
Kathleen Bowen 
Susan A. Schultz
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, Hilda A. Manuel, Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to 
the Secretary of the Interior by the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended, and delegated to me by Secretarial Order No. 3150 as extended by Secretarial Order No. 
3177, as amended, do hereby approve the Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa. This 
Constitution is effective as of this date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be 
construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

/s/ Hilda A. Manuel
Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs
Washington, D.C.

Date: Jul 10 1998

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL (2004 AMENDMENTS)
I, Terry L. Virden, Regional Director, Midwest Regional Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 
of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 
as amended, and further delegated to me by 3 IAM 4.4, do hereby approve Proposed Amendment 
“A” now designated as Amendment Number I to the Constitution of the Little River Band of Ottawa 
Indians. This amendment is effective as of this date: PROVIDED, that nothing in this approval shall 
be construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

I, Terry L. Virden, Regional Director, Midwest Regional Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 
of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 
as amended, and further delegated to me by 3 IAM 4.4, do hereby approve Proposed Amendment 
“B” now designated as Amendment Number II to the Constitution of the Little River Band of 
Ottawa Indians. This amendment is effective as of this date: PROVIDED, that nothing in this 
approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary 
to Federal law.

I, Terry L. Virden, Regional Director, Midwest Regional Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 
of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 
as amended, and further delegated to me by 3 IAM 4.4, do hereby approve Proposed Amendment 
“C” now designated as Amendment Number III to the Constitution of the Little River Band of 
Ottawa Indians. This amendment is effective as of this date: PROVIDED, that nothing in this 
approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary 
to Federal law.

Terrance L. Virden
Regional Director

Date: May 13, 2004

