Constitution of the Lower Sioux Indian Community in 
Minnesota

As Amended Through September 19, 2007.
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux residing on the Lower Sioux Reservation 
under the Pipestone jurisdiction in the State of Minnesota, in order to form a more 
perfect union, develop our natural resources, insure our domestic tranquility, 
promote the general welfare, to enjoy certain rights of home rule, to provide 
education in schools of higher learning including vocational, trade, high schools, and 
colleges for our people, and to secure the opportunities offered us under the Indian 
Reorganization Act, do hereby establish the following Constitution and Bylaws; and 
we solemnly affirm that it is our earnest intention faithfully to support, respect and 
promote the integrity of the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution of 
the State of Minnesota, together with all laws pertaining thereto which are the 
constituted authority of our commonwealth.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 SECTION 1. The name of this organization shall be the "Lower Sioux Indian 
Community in the State of Minnesota."
 
 

ARTICLE II - TERRITORY

 
 SECTION 1. The territory of the Lower Sioux Indian Community shall be all the land 
now held in trust by the United States for the Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux Indians 
within the confines of the Lower Sioux Indian Reservation, and shall include such 
other lands as may in the future be acquired within or without said boundary lines by 
the Department of the Interior or by the Community for our use in the State of
Minnesota.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. Membership in the Lower Sioux Indian Community in the State of 
Minnesota shall consist of the following:

(a) The bona fide Indian residents of the Lower Sioux Reservation whose names 
appear on, or are entitled to appear on the official census roll of the Minnesota 
Mdewakanton Sioux Indians as of April 1, 1934, with the official supplement thereto 
of January 1, 1935.

(b) The bona fide Indian residents of the Lower Sioux Reservation whose names 
appear on various other Sioux Indian rolls, provided that such persons transfer their 
enrollment to the Minnesota Sioux rolls, with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(c) All children of any member who is a resident of the Lower Sioux Reservation at 
the time of the birth of said children.

SEC. 2. Adoption -- All nonmembers seeking to become members of the Community 
must pay a fee of $2, which fee must accompany the application to a Membership 
Committee whose decision shall be subject to the approval of the Community 
Council. Notice of such application for adoption must be publicly posted for a period 
of thirty (30) days. Any and all protests against the admission of such applicant or 
applicants shall be made in writing and filed with the Community Council before the 
expiration of the period of posting. The decision of the Community Council shall be 
subject to a popular vote at the next annual election.

SEC. 3. Any person who is a member of the Community, but has removed therefrom 
for a period of two (2) years, shall automatically forfeit all rights and privileges to the 
benefits of said community such as land assignments and sharing in community 
profits.

(a) Any member who does not have the rights and privileges of membership may 
acquire such rights and privileges by establishing residency in the Community for a 
period of five continuous years; provided that, if a member was a bona fide resident 
of the Community on the date this subsection (a) was approved by the required 
Community Vote, such member may acquire the rights and privileges of membership 
under such Community law as was in effect prior to the date of such vote.

SEC. 4. The Community Council may make ordinances governing the acquisition of 
membership that will strictly adhere to the requirements of this Article.

SEC. 5. Disenrollments are expressly prohibited unless the enrolled member 
personally relinquishes their membership by providing written notice to the 
Community Council.

SEC. 6. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to deprive any Minnesota 
Mdewakanton Sioux Indian of any vested right.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 SECTION 1. The governing body of the Community organization shall be called "The 
Community Council of the Lower Sioux Indian Reservation", and shall be composed 
of five members who shall be duly elected by secret ballot by the qualified voters of 
the Community.

SEC 2. The first election of councilmen under this Constitution and Bylaws shall be 
called and conducted by a provisional election committee appointed by the present 
community committee under such rules and regulations as the community 
committee may prescribe. At said first election, councilmen shall be elected for a 
term of two (2) years. Each elective officer shall have the right of reelection at the 
expiration of his term of office.

SEC. 2A. Beginning with the 1997 election of councilmen, the three candidates 
receiving the most votes shall be elected for a term of four years. The two 
candidates receiving the fourth and fifth most votes shall be elected for a term of 
two years. At the end of such two year terms, there shall be a new election for these 
two positions. The two candidates receiving the most votes in the new election for 
these two positions shall be elected for a term of four years. Thereafter there shall 
be an election every two years for the councilmen positions whose terms expire that 
year, and all councilmen, the members of the Community Council shall meet and 
shall elect from their membership by secret ballot a President, a Vice President, a 
Secretary, a Treasurer, and an Assistant Treasurer, who shall hold office for a term 
of 2 years or until their successors are elected.

SEC 3. The provisional election committee provided for in Section 2 of this article 
shall issue an election certificate to those members of the Community Council so 
elected. Said members of the Community Council receiving such certificates of 
election shall meet and organize for business and shall elect for their membership by 
secret ballot one President, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and an Assistant Secretary
Treasurer, who shall hold office for a term of 2 years or until their successor elected. 
At the expiration of such term of office, election of officers shall be had for each 
succeeding term of 2 years.

SEC 4. The Community Council shall have authority to appoint subordinate officers, 
boards, and committees.

SEC. 5. The Community Council shall at its first meeting after election choose and 
appoint form among the community members the following department chairmen:

(1) A Land Chairman: To him shall be referred all matters pertaining to the 
parceling, exchange, or distribution of all lands within the confines of the Lower 
Sioux Reservation. He shall handle all matters pertaining to said lands and their 
proper use in such manner as the Council prescribes and regulates. In all cases of 
assignment of acreage to anyone entitled to receive such, he shall make his 

recommendations and finds to the Council, and the Council shall take such action as 
they think proper.

(2) An Agricultural Chairman: He shall have charge and management of Community 
Farm Projects, the promotion of economical farm management, and shall cooperate 
in the adoption and promotion of any recommendations of Federal and State 
agricultural experts.

(3) A Forest and Conservation Chairman: He shall direct the management, 
protection, and cultivation of all wood lots and forest areas so that a sustained yield 
is insured, and shall have charge of and promote the conservation and protection of 
all wildlife and game within the confines of the reservation, in cooperation with 
constituted authorities.

(4) A Public Welfare Chairman: He shall have charge of all matters relative to the 
public welfare of the Community, such as public health, employment, safety, law and 
order, and other duties which the Council may prescribe.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS

 
 SECTION 1. Enumerated Powers.-- The Community Council shall exercise the 
following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the constitution or statutes 
of the United States, and subject further to all express restrictions upon such powers 
contained in this Constitution and Bylaws.

(a) To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local Governments on behalf of the 
Community, and to advise and consult with the representatives of the Interior 
Department on all activities of the Department that may affect the Lower Sioux 
Indian Community.

(b) To employ counsel for the protection and advancement of the rights of the 
Community and its members, the choice of counsel and the fixing of fees to be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(c) To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of community 
lands, interests in lands, or other community assets.

(d) To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation estimates 
or Federal projects for the benefit of the Community prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e) To make assignments of community land to members of the Community in 
conformity with Article IX of this Constitution.

(f) To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Community in accordance 
with the terms of a charter which may be issued-to the Community by the Secretary 
of the Interior.

(g) To appropriate for public purposes of the Lower Sioux Indian Community 
available funds within the exclusive control of the Community and, subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior, any other available community funds.

(h) To levy assessments upon members of the Community for the use of Community 
property and privileges, and to permit the performance of reservation labor in lieu 
thereof, and to levy license fees, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
upon nonmembers doing business within the reservation: Provided, however, That 
any such assessment upon members of the Community shall have the approval of 
the Community, at a special election at which at least thirty (30) percent of those 
entitled to vote shall vote.

(i) To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and general welfare of the 
Community by regulating the conduct of trade and the use and disposition of 
property upon the reservation, provided that any ordinance directly affecting 
nonmembers of the Community shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior, and provided further that nonrestricted property of members which was 
obtained outside of any help or assistance of the United States Government or the 
Community may be disposed of without restriction.

(j) To establish ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
providing for the maintenance of law and order upon the Reservation and for the 
establishment of courts to enforce such ordinances.

(k) To regulate the manner of taking nominations for Community officers and of 
holding community elections.

(l) To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Community Council itself and 
of other Community agencies and community officials.

(m) To encourage and foster the arts, crafts, traditions, and culture of the 
Mdewakanton Sioux Indians of Minnesota.

(n) To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes and to regulate the 
activities of all such organizations under ordinances which shall be subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior.

(o) To protect and preserve the property, wildlife and natural resources of the 
Community.

(p) To delegate to subordinate boards, or community officials, or to cooperative 
associations, which are open to all members of the Community, any of the foregoing 
powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated 
powers.

(q) To select delegates to sit in the annual conference of the Minnesota 
Mdewakanton Sioux Indians and in the National Council of the entire Sioux Nation.

SEC. 2. Any resolution or ordinance which, by terms of this Constitution, is subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent 

of this jurisdiction, who shall, within 10 days thereafter, approve or disapprove the 
same, if the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall 
thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the 
same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within 90 
days from the date of its enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any 
cause by notifying the Community Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or ordinance submitted 
to him within 10 days of its enactment, he shall advise the Community Council of his 
reasons therefor. If these reasons appear to the Community Council insufficient, it 
may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, approve the same 
in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

SEC. 3. Future Powers. -- The Community Council may exercise such further powers 
as may in the future be delegated to the Community by the Secretary of the Interior, 
or by any duly authorized official or agency of government or by any member of the 
community.

SEC. 4. Reserved Powers. -- Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the 
Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux Indians in respect to any interests or affairs of the 
Lower Sioux Reservation, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution, shall not 
be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the people of the Lower Sioux 
Indian Community of Minnesota, through the adoption of appropriate Bylaws and 
Constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 SECTION 1. Upon adoption and final approval of this Constitution, an election shall 
be held for the selection of members of the Community Council as provided in Article 
IV. Elections thereafter shall be held every 2 years, and not less than 30 days before 
the expiration of the term of office, of the members of the council.

SEC 2. The Community Council shall by ordinance establish the date and manner of 
control of the elections.

SEC. 3. At a meeting of the Council previous to any election, the Council shall 
appoint two judges and two clerks of election from among the qualified voters who 
are not candidates for office. It shall be the duty of these officers of election properly 
to conduct the election. They will certify the result of said election to the Community 
Council, who in turn will formally notify the successful candidates of their election. 
They shall also formally notify the Superintendent of the Pipestone jurisdiction as to 
the result of said election.

SEC. 4. Any qualified voter who is in good standing shall be considered as an eligible 
candidate for office.

SEC. 5. In order to acquire the right of franchise, a voter must qualify by having 
reached the age of 18 years of age or older, on the day of the election and be a 
member of the Community.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - REMOVAL

 
 SECTION 1. The removal from office of a member of the Community Council shall 
be as follows: In the event of a complaint in writing, charging improper conduct or 
neglect of duty, signed by 25 members of the Community, against a member of the 
Community Council, it shall be the duty of the Community Council, if such complaint 
is considered of sufficient merit, to appoint a committee of 5 members of the 
Community, independent of its own membership and those handling the complaints, 
to hold a public hearing and make written report to the Community Council of its 
findings, a copy of such report to be furnished the accused. Upon receipt of such 
report, the Community Council shall meet in executive session to consider such 
report and hear testimony of the accused. If satisfied of the truth of the complaint, 
the Community Council may remove such accused officer.

SEC. 2. In the event of the death, removal from the Community, resignation, or 
conviction of a felony or misdemeanor involving dishonesty of any member of the 
Community Council, the remaining members shall declare that a vacancy exists and 
shall formally call a special election for the filling of such vacancy. At such election, 
any councilman removed by the Council may refer his case to the people by seeking 
reelection. However, if such vacancy occurs within 90 days before a general election, 
the Council may appoint some qualified member of the Community to complete the 
unexpired term.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - REFERENDUM

 
 SECTION 1. Any exercise of any enumerated powers lodged in the Community 
Council shall be subject to a referendum vote of the people upon a written petition 
signed by not less than 25 percent of the total number of voters in the last regular 
election, provided that not less than 30 percent of the eligible voters shall vote in 
any such referendum.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - LAND

 
 SECTION 1. Land Assignments. --The land within the territory of the Lower Sioux 
Indian Community which was purchased by the United States for the Mdewakanton 
Sioux residing in the State of Minnesota on May 20, 1886, and their descendants, 
may be assigned to any Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux entitled thereto, and may not 
be assigned to any other person although such person is a member of this 
Community. However, land purchased by or for the Lower Sioux Indian Community 
may be assigned to any member of the Community.

SEC. 2. All applications for the assignment of land shall be made to the Community 
Council. In the case of an application for an assignment of the land, above referred 
to, bought for certain Mdewakanton Sioux of Minnesota, the Council shall 
recommend to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction what action shall be taken. If 
the Superintendent, after consultation with the Council and the interested parties, 
disagrees with the final recommendation of the Council, he shall refer the case to the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

All assignments under this section shall be granted by or under the direction of the 
Secretary of the Interior, and evidenced by a Certificate of Assignment, which 
certificate shall be of the same force and effect as certificates of assignment issued 
previous to the organization of this Community. Such an assignment shall be known 
as a "Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux Assignment."

SEC. 3. In the case of an application for an assignment of land which has been 
bought by or for this Community, the Council may approve or reject such application. 
The action of the Council shall be final and such action shall be reported to the 
Superintendent of the Pipestone jurisdiction within 10 days. An assignment under 
this section shall be known as a "Community Assignment."

SEC. 4. In any assignment of land, preference shall be given, firs to heads of 
families of Indian blood who are without land; and, secondly, to heads of families of 
Indian blood which shall have already received assignments consisting of less than 
an economic unit of agricultural land or other land of equal value, such economic unit 
to be determined by the Community Council in ordinances which shall be subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior or his designated representatives. If either 
the husband or wife is not of Indian blood, such person is not to be considered as the 
head of a family under this section.

The Community Council may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of $5 on approval of an 
assignment made under section 3.

SEC. 5. No family shall at any time hold more than one assignment of land; 
Provided, however, That the Community Council may take into consideration the 
economic needs of a large and a small family, a family being defined as a husband 
and wife, living together as such, whether there be children or not. In the event of a 
legal divorce or separation and there be children, the parent who provides for and 
maintains a home for the children shall be considered as the head of the family.

SEC. 6. If the holder of any land assignment absents himself, with his family, from 
residence upon his assignment for a period of 2 years, such absence becomes 
evidence that he has relinquished his claim to such assignment. It shall then be the 
duty of the Community Council, provided reasonable notice has been given, to 
declare the assignment vacated and notify the Superintendent of the Pipestone 
jurisdiction.

Any holder of a land assignment, excepting the aged and disabled within the confines 
of the community area, shall personally cultivate and use said land to the best of his 
ability, and cooperate with Federal and State experts for the proper development of 
the land.

SEC. 7. The Community Council may make all further regulations, by ordinances, as 
shall be necessary governing the use, lease under exceptional conditions, and 
inheritance of assigned land; Provided, however, That such ordinances shall be 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior insofar as they may affect 
"Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux Assignments."

SEC. 8. Any holder of a land assignment who willfully neglects to make proper use of 
his assignment according to the ordinances prescribed by the Community Council 
governing the use and cultivation of such land, shall have his assignment subject to 
cancellation. It shall be the duty of the Community Council to warn such a person of 
the possibility of the loss of his assignment. If the assignee continues to neglect to 
make proper use of his land, it shall be the duty of the Community Council to notify 
the Superintendent of the Pipestone jurisdiction, who shall then take such action as 
he may deem necessary looking toward the proper cultivation and improvement of 
the land.

SEC. 9. Any member of this Community who shall transfer any land of which he is 
the owner to the United States in trust for this Community shall be entitled to an 
assignment of the same land or of other available land of equal value.

SEC. 10. Improvements of any character made upon assigned land may he willed to 
and inherited by members of the Lower Sioux Indian Community, and if the 
improvements are made upon any "Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux Assignments", 
they may also be willed to and inherited by any Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux 
Indian entitled to such an assignment. When improvements are not possible of fair 
division, the Community Council shall dispose of them under such regulations as it 
may provide for the benefit of such heirs. No permanent improvements may he 
removed from any community or assigned land without the consent of the 
Community Council.

SEC. 11. No member of the Lower Sioux Indian Community may use or occupy 
community lands except under an assignment or lease.

SEC. 12. Unassigned land shall be managed by the Community Council for the 
benefit of the members of the entire Community, in accordance with the regulations 
prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior under section 6 of the Act of June 18, 
1934 (48 Stat. 984).

SEC. 13. Community funds may be used, with the consent of the Secretary of the 
Interior, to acquire land for the Lower Sioux Indian Community.
 
 

ARTICLE X - GAME LAWS

 
 SECTION 1. It is hereby understood that any and all treaties assuring the rights and 
privileges of people of Indian blood the right to hunt and fish are not affected by 
anything in this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - COURT OF DOMESTIC RELATIONS

 
 SECTION 1. The Community Council is hereby authorized to establish a Court of 
Domestic Relations for the proper handling of all misdemeanors and disputes, and for 
the maintenance of Law and Order within the limits and jurisdiction of the 
Community.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - MINERAL RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1. The Lower Sioux Indian Community shall have authority to protect and 
develop all mineral resources to which it now has, or hereafter shall have, title.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified 
voters of the Lower Sioux Indian Community voting at an election called for that 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least 30 percent of those 
entitled to vote shall vote in such election; but no amendments shall become 
effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be 
the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed 
amendment upon receipt of a written resolution of the Community Council signed by 
at least three members of the Council.

[Approved originally by voters of the Lower Sioux Reservation May 16, 1936, 
pursuant to a ratification vote authorized by the Secretary of the Interior by order 
dated April 23, 1936]

[Approved originally by the Secretary of the Interior June 11, 1936.]

[Article VI-Elections, Section 5 of the original constitution was amended to change 
the voting age from 21 years to 18 years. The Secretary of the Interior approved the 
amendment June 28, 1977.]

[Article IV was amended by adding new Subsection 2A pursuant to a vote June 3, 
1997, as authorized by the Secretary of the Interior. The Secretary of the Interior 
approved the amendment July 3, 1997.]

[Article III was amended by adding new Subsection 3(a) pursuant to a vote 
November. 17, 1998, as authorized by the Secretary of the Interior. The Secretary of 
the Interior approved the amendment November 23, 1998]

[Article III, Section 4 was amended by eliminating the Secretarial approval 
requirement and requiring ordinances passed by the Community Council to strictly 
adhere to the requirements of Article III. Article III, Section 5 was amended by 
expressly prohibiting disenrollments and by eliminating the Membership Committee 
requirement. Both amendments were approved by the voters of the Lower Sioux 
Indian Community on August 17, 2007. The Secretary of the Interior approved the 
amendments September 19, 2007.]


I CERTIFY THAT THE FOREGOING CONSTITUTION OF THE LOWER SIOUX INDIAN 
COMMUNITY IN MINNESOTA IS AN ACCURATE COPY OF SUCH CONSTITUTION AS 

DULY ADOPTED AND AMENDED THROUGH SEPTEMBER 19, 2007.

Margaret Harp, Secretary
Lower Sioux Community Council
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE
LOWER SIOUX INDIAN COMMUNITY IN MINNESOTA
 
 (As Amended Through September 19, 1998)

ARTICLE 1  - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

SECTION 1. The President of the Community Council shall preside at all meetings of 
the Council. He shall at all times have general supervision of the affairs of the 
Community. It shall also be the duty of the President to countersign all checks 
against funds of the organization.

SEC. 2. The Vice President shall preside at all meetings of the Community Council in 
the absence of the President and shall act in his stead in all matters pertaining to the 
office of President.

SEC. 3. The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the 
Community Council and furnish copies thereof to the Superintendent and the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He shall attend to the keeping of the official records 
of the Community Council and shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient 
handling of all correspondence pertaining to the business of the Community Council 
and the Community. All official records of the Secretary shall be open to inspection 
to the members of the Community at all reasonable times.

SEC. 4. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in the possession of the 
Community from any source. At such time as the Community Council or the 
Secretary of the Interior shall deem necessary, he shall give a bond with a surety 
company of recognized standing in an amount to be determined by the Community 
Council, such surety and bond to be approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. 
He shall keep an accurate record of all community funds and shall disburse the same 
in accordance with the vote of the Community Council. The books of the Treasurer 
containing the financial status of the Community shall be open to audit and 

examination by duly authorized officers of the Secretary of the Interior at all times, 
and shall be open to inspection by members of the Community Council and its 
officers.

SEC. 5. The Assistant Secretary-Treasurer shall act as assistant to the Secretary and 
Treasurer of the Community, and shall be empowered to transact business in their 
stead in case of their absence from the Community or their inability through sickness 
or otherwise to perform the duties of their office. He shall give bond upon the same 
conditions as the Treasurer.
 
 

ARTICLE II - OATH

 
 SECTION 1. All officers when elected shall be duly installed and shall subscribe to an 
oath of office to support the Constitution of the United States and this Constitution. 
Such officers may be sworn in by any officer qualified to administer an oath.
 
 

ARTICLE III - SALARIES

 
 SECTION 1. No salaries from Community funds shall be paid nor changed in amount 
unless approved by the members of the Community at a referendum.

SEC. 2. The members of the Community Council or their designated representatives 
shall be reimbursed from funds within the exclusive control of the Community for any 
legitimate or reasonable expenditure or expense incurred by them and paid for from 
personal funds, while acting for the Community in its management, when approved 
by the Community Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. Stated meetings of the Community Council shall be held the first Friday 
of January, April, July, and October. Called meetings shall be held at the discretion of 
the President or upon request of three members of the Community Council. Three 
days' written notice of called meetings shall be given to all Council members.

SEC. 2. Three members shall constitute a quorum.

SEC. 3. The Community Council shall prescribe such rules of order for its meetings as 
it desires.

SEC. 4. The Meetings of the Community Council shall be public to all members of the 
Community except all executive sessions.
 
 

ARTICLE V - COOPERATION

 
 SECTION 1. The Community Council shall work in very close cooperation with the 
Indian Service and various departments of the United States Government and the 
State of Minnesota in matters of charity, education, recreation, social work, and 
public health.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 SECTION 1. This Constitution and Bylaws, when ratified by a majority of the qualified 
voters of the Minnesota Mdewakanton Sioux residing on the Lower Sioux Indian 
Reservation, voting at a special election called for the purpose by the Secretary of 
the Interior, provided, that at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in 
such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and if approved, 
shall be effective from the date of approval.

[Approved originally by voters of the Lower Sioux Reservation May 16, 1936, 
pursuant to a ratification vote authorized by the Secretary of the Interior by order 
dated April 23, 1936.]

[Approved originally by the Secretary of the Interior June 11, 1936]


I CERTIFY THAT TEE FOREGOING BYLAWS OF THE LOWER SIOUX INDIAN 
COMMUNITY IN MINNESOTA IS AN ACCURATE COPY OF SUCH BYLAWS AS DULY 

ADOPTED AND AMENDED THROUGH SEPTEMBER 19, 2007.

Margaret Harp, Secretary
Lower Sioux Community Council
 
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE
LOWER SIOUX COMMUNITY COUNCIL
 
 Of THE 
 
STATE OF MINNESOTA

AMENDMENT I


 
  
 Section 5, Article VI, Election shall be amended to read: 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 5. In order to acquire the right of franchise, a voter must qualify by having 
reached the age of 18 years of age or older, on the day of the election and be a 
member of the Community.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, George V. Goodwin, Area Director, Minneapolis Area, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by 
virtue of the authority granted to me by delegated authority from the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs dated March 4, 1972, do hereby approve Amendment I to the 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Lower Sioux Community of the State of Minnesota.

(Sgd)
George V. Goodwin
Area Director

Minneapolis, Minnesota 
Date:(Sgd)June 28, 1977
 
 

AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION 
OF THE LOWER SIOUX INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 A new Subsection 2A is added to Article IV, Governing Body reading as follows:

2A. Beginning with the 1997 election of councilme n, the three candidates receiving 
the most votes shall be elected for a term of four years. The two candidates 
receiving the fourth and fifth most votes shall be elected for a term of two years. At 
the end of such two year terms, there shall be a new election for these two positions. 
The two candidates receiving the most votes in the new election for these two 
positions shall be elected for a term of four years. Thereafter there shall be an 
election every two years for the councilmen positions whose terms expire that year, 
and all councilmen shall be elected for four year terms. Each elected officer shall 
have the right of reelection at the expiration of his/her term of office. Every two 
years, after the election of new councilmen, the members of the Community Council 
shall meet and shall elect from their membership by secret ballot a President, a Vice 
President, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and an Assistant Treasurer, who shall hold office 
for a term of 2 years or until their successors are elected.

Numerical Designation

Having been duly adopted and approved, the proposed amendment is hereby 
designated as Amendment No. II to the Constitution of the Lower Sioux Community 
Council.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
 
 AMENDMENT NO. II

I, LARRY MORRIN Acting Area Director, Minneapolis Area Office, Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, which was delegated to me by 209 
DM, Secretary's Orders 3150 and 3177, and 10 BIAM Bulletin 13, as amended, do 
hereby approve the foregoing Amendment No. II to the Constitution of the Lower 
Sioux Indian Community. This amendment was duly adopted by a majority of the 
qualified voters who cast ballots in the June 3, 1997 election.

(Sgd)
7-3-97 
Date

(Sgd)
Larry Morrin
Acting Area Director
Minneapolis Area Office
Bureau of Indian Affairs

United States Department of the Interior
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

MINNEAPOLIS AREA OFFICE 
 
 331 SOUTH 2ND AVENUE 
MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA 55401-2241
 
 

AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION 
OF THE LOWER SIOUX INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 A new Subsection (a) is added to Article III, Membership. Section 3 and the new 
subsection 3(a) would read as follows (new language in underlined type):

SEC. 3. Any person who is a member of the Community, but has removed therefrom 
for a period of two (2) years, shall automatically forfeit all rights and privileges to the 
benefits of said community such as land assignments and sharing in community 
profits.

(A) Any member who does not have the rights and privileges of membership may 
acquire such rights and privileges by establishing residency in the Community for a 
period of five continuous years; provided that, if a member was a bona fide resident 
of the Community on the date this subsection (a) was approved by the required 
Community Vote, such member may acquire the rights and privileges of membership 
under such Community law as was in effect prior to the date of such vote.

Numerical Designation

Having been duly adopted and approved, the proposed amendment is hereby 
designated as Amendment No. III to the Constitution of the Lower Sioux Community 
Council.

United States Department of the Interior
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

MINNEAPOLIS AREA OFFICE 
 
 331 SOUTH 2ND AVENUE 
MINNEAPOLIS, MINNESOTA 55401-22421
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 AMENDMENT No. III

I, Larry Morrin, Acting Area Director, Minneapolis Area Office, Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, which was delegated to me by 209 
DM, Secretary's Orders 3150 and 3177, and 10 BIAM Bulletin 13, as amended, do 
hereby approve the foregoing Amendment No. III to the Constitution of the Lower 
Sioux Indian Community. This amendment was duly adopted by a majority of the 
qualified voters who cast ballots in the November 17, 1998 election.

(stamped)
NOV 23 1998
Date

(Sgd)
Larry Morrin
Area Director
Minneapolis Area Office
Bureau of Indian Affairs
 
 

AMENDMENT IV
TO THE CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE
LOWER SIOUX INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 Article III - Membership

Section 4. The Community Council may make ordinances governing the acquisition of 
membership that will strictly adhere to the requirements of this Article.

Section 5. Disenrollments are expressly prohibited unless the enrolled member 
personally relinquishes their membership by providing written notice to the 
Community Council.

Having been duly adopted and approved, the proposed Amendment A is hereby 
designated as Amendment Number IV to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Lower 
Sioux Indian Community in Minnesota.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, Terrance Virden, Regional Director, Midwest Regional Office, Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and further delegated to me by 3 IAM 
4.4, do hereby approve Amendment A, adopted by a vote of more than 30% of the 
qualified voters, and now designated as “Amendment Number IV”, to the 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Lower Sioux Indian Community in Minnesota. This 
amendment is effective as of this date: PROVIDED, that nothing in this approval shall 
be construed as authorizing any action that would be contrary to Federal law.

(Sgd)
Terrance L. Virden
Regional Director
Midwest Regional Office 
Bureau of Indian Affairs

(Sgd)
9-19-07
Date

