 
  
 Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe 
 
PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation, in order to 
establish a more perfect tribal organization, promote the general welfare, develop 
better school facilities, conserve and develop our lands and resources, and 
secure to ourselves and our posterity the power to exercise certain rights of 
home rule not inconsistent with the Federal, State, and local laws, applicable to 
Indian tribes, do ordain and establish this constitution for the Lower Brule Sioux 
Tribe.

ARTICLE I – TERRITORY

SECTION 1. The jurisdiction of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of Indians shall 
extend to the territory within the original boundaries of the Lower Brule 
Reservation as established by the Act of March 2, 1889, and to all other lands 
added thereto under any law of the United States.

SECTION 2. The Lower Brule Sioux Reservation shall constitute one (1) voting 
district. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

ARTICLE II – MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1. The membership of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe shall consist as 
follows:

a) All persons of Indian blood whose name appear on the official census roll 
of the tribe as of April 1, 1935, and, after the effective date of the amended 
constitution, only such other person who are of Lower Brule Sioux Indian 
blood and whose names appear on the official census roll of September 2, 
1958.

b) All children born to any member of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe who is a 
resident of the reservation at the time of birth of said children but children 
born to any member after the effective date of this amended constitution 
and possessing at least one fourth degree Lower Brule Indian blood shall be

members regardless of the residence of their parents at the time of their 
birth.

SECTION 2. The tribal Council shall have the power to promulgate ordinances 
subject to the review by the Secretary of the Interior covering future membership 
and the adoption of new members provided only that no person may be adopted 
who is not a resident of the reservation.

ARTICLE III – GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe shall consist of a 
Council, known as the Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council, hereinafter designated 
as the “Tribal Council”.

SECTION 2. The voters shall elect at large a Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Treasurer 
and three Councilmen. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 3. The Tribal Council so organized shall elect from within or outside of 
its own members (1) a Secretary, (2) a Sergeant at Arms, (3) a Chaplain, and (4) 
other such officers and committees as may be deemed necessary, but such other 
officers and committees shall have no vote in the Tribal Council. (Amendment II, 
September 2, 1986)

SECTION 4. The members of the present Tribal Council shall hold office until the 
next regular election at which time all of the terms shall expire and new 
councilmen shall be elected in accordance with this article of this amended 
constitution. The elected councilmen shall serve for two years. (Amendment II, 
September 2, 1986)

ARTICLE IV – ELECTIONS

SECTION 1. All enrolled resident members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe 
eighteen (18) years of age or over shall be eligible to register and vote but no one 
may vote unless he has maintained a legal residence within the reservation for a 
period of one year immediately prior to the election. Individuals incarcerated in 
jails or prisons shall not be eligible to vote in general, special, or referendum 
elections. (Amendment I, June 17, 1974 and Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 2. Except for the first Tribal election held under this amended 
constitution, elections shall be held on the first Tuesday of September in even 
numbered years in accordance with procedures enumerated in this constitution. 
In the event the Tribal Council fails to select an Election Board at the June regular 
meeting of each election year, the Superintendent shall do so within 30 days of 
the June meeting. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 3.

(a)  Except for the first Tribal election held under this amended constitution, the 
Council shall appoint a five (5) member election Board plus five (5) alternates at 
the regular June council meeting each election year. The Election Board shall 
then from its members elect a Chairman and shall act independently in carrying 
out its duties.

(b) Qualifications of Election Board Members:

1. Twenty-one (21) years of age.
2.  May not be an immediate relative of a candidate for office. Relative is 
defined as father, mother, spouse, brother, sister, child (by birth, marriage 
or adoption).
3.  Shall not have been convicted of a felony in the last ten (10) years by an 
Indian, State, or Federal Court.

(c)  Nominations of candidates for the Tribal Council shall be by petition signed by 
not less than five (5) legal, registered voters. A voter may sign only one petition.

(d)  Except for the first election held under this amended constitution, petitions for 
nominations along with a filing fee shall be filed with the Chairman of the Election 
Board, on or before the third Friday in June of each election year.

(e)  Except for the first election held under this amended constitution, the list of 
qualified candidates shall be posted by the Chairman of the Election Board the 
second Monday of July of each election year. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 4. Economic Rights. All members of the Tribe shall be accorded equal 
opportunity to participate in the economic resources and activities without 
prejudice. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 5. Civil Liberties. All members of the Tribe may enjoy without hindrance 
freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, and association. 
(Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 6. Certification of Election. It shall be the duty of members of the 
Election board appointed by the Tribal Council, to certify the results of the 
election by posting in the Tribal Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs office and other 
places as appropriate. This shall be done within three (3) days after the election. 
Any appeal to the certification must be filed with the Tribal Court within five (5) 
days. The Court shall render its decision within twenty (20) days. Any appeal will 
not hinder the installation of council members. (Amendment II, September 2, 
1986)

SECTION 7. Installation of Councilmen. Newly elected members who have been 
duly certified by the Election Board shall be installed at the October meeting of 
the Tribal Council following the election upon subscribing to the following oath 
administered by the Chief Judge.

“I, , do hereby solemnly swear (or affirm) that I shall preserve, support, and 
protect the Constitution of the United States and the Constitution and Bylaws of 
the lower Brule Sioux Tribe to the best of my ability, so help me, God.” 
(Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 8. Qualifications of Councilmen. No person shall be a candidate for 
membership in the Tribal Council unless he shall be a member of the Lower Brule 
Sioux Tribe, at least twenty-one (21) years of age, shall not have been convicted 
of a felony by Indian, State, or Federal Court and shall not have been involved in 
actions as defined by the Code of Ethics as determined by the Tribal Council and 
courts of law, and shall have resided on the Lower Brule Reservation for a period 
of one year next preceding the election. A full pardon shall be accepted as 
erasing said conviction. Dishonorable Discharge that has been upgraded by the 
proper military authority shall also be accepted. The Election Board shall be the 
sole judge of the qualifications of candidates ensuring that each candidate is 
afforded due process. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

ARTICLE V – VACANCIES AND REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

SECTION 1. If an officer, councilman, selected or elected official shall die, resign, 
permanently leave the reservation, or while in office be found guilty of a felony or

misdemeanor in any Indian, State, or Federal Court, the Tribal Council shall 
declare the position vacant and shall appoint a qualified individual to fill the 
unexpired term. (Amendment III, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 2. The Tribal Council may by a unanimous vote of the remaining council 
vote to expel any member for gross neglect of duty or improper conduct as 
enumerated in the Code of Ethics, provided the member is given a written notice 
stating the charges against him and the time and place of hearing which shall be 
at least five days after the date of the notice, and the member has had a full 
hearing and a reasonable opportunity to present his defense to the charges. 
(Amendment III, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 3. If a councilman moves away and makes his home off the reservation 
for a period longer than three months, the office shall be declared vacant by the 
Tribal Council, who shall appoint a qualified individual to fill the unexpired term. 
(Amendment III, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 4. Any selected or elected official may be removed from office by filing 
with the Tribal Council of a petition setting forth specific charges as specified by 
a Code of Ethics against the official (s) bearing the signatures of no less than 
thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters voting in the last regular tribal election. 
Upon receipt of such petition the Tribal Council shall, within five (5) days, notify 
the official (s) of the charges against him and provide no less than ten (10) days 
to respond to such charges in writing. The Tribal Council, no less than five (5) 
days after receipt of the accused official’s reply to the charges shall determine 
whether or not to call an election on the recall petition. Should the Tribal Council 
decide to not call an election for the recall of an elected official, the petitioners 
shall file within thirty (30) days to the Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Court for review. If 
the official in question is a member of the judicial system, the appeal would be to 
the appellate court. If the official is recalled by an election, the Tribal Council shall 
declare the position vacant and fill in accordance with Articles 1 or 3 of this 
section. (Amendment III, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 5. Code of Ethics for all elected or selected officials. Gross neglect and 
improper conduct of Article V, Vacancies and removal from office should be 
interpreted by the Tribal Council in accordance with these definitions.

(a)  Gross Neglect – As evidence through any or all of the following as determined 
by the Tribal Council:

1.  Gross incompetency - Unable or unwilling to perform the duties of office.

2.  Inability to handle private affairs as evidenced through garnishment 
proceedings or court actions ordering payments of delinquent loans or 
debts.

3.  Abandonment of office – Not attending three consecutive Tribal Council 
meetings or moving off the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation.

4.  Excessive absenteeism – Five days of unexcused absence in any thirty 
(30) day period.

(b)  Improper Conduct - Determined by Tribal Council:

1.  Converting tribal property or monies without authorization through 
omission or misrepresentation of facts.

2.  Misuse of office - Unauthorized personal use of tribal equipment, 
manpower, or materials.

3.  Public conduct so as to question the integrity or endanger the Lower 
Brule Sioux Tribe or its members, including but not limited to illegal sale of 
intoxicants, bootlegging, dope and controlled substances, or misuse of 
firearms.

4.  Malfeasance of office – Including gross partiality or oppression.

(c) Improper Conduct - Convictions by legal courts:

1.  Conviction of a felony.

2. Three low-misdemeanor convictions within a twelve (12) month period.

3.  Crimes in office – Corruption, extortion, fraudulent claims for 
compensations - salary,
mileage, per diem during an unexcused absence or an unaccountable period 
of time.

4.  Contempt of Court.

5.  Any high-misdemeanor, including, but not limited to malicious mischief, 
statutory rape, hit and run, assault, battery, or assault and battery.

6.  Driving while under the influence of alcohol twice in a twelve (12) month 
period. (Amendment III, September 2, 1986)

ARTICLE VI – POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

SECTION 1. Enumerated Powers. The Tribal Council of the Lower Brule Sioux 
Reservation shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations 
imposed by the statues applicable to Indian tribes or the applicable provisions of 
the Constitution of the United States, and subject further to all express 
restrictions upon such powers contained in this Constitution and the attached 
Bylaws:

a.  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement of the rights 
of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe and its members, the choice of the counsel 
and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior.

b.  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, on behalf of 
the tribe and to advise and consult with representatives of the Interior 
Department on all activities of the Department that may affect the Lower 
Brule Sioux Reservation.

c.  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation 
estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Lower Brule Sioux 
Reservation prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 
Budget and Congress.

d. To appropriate for public purpose of the reservation any available funds.

e.  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and general welfare 
of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe and to regulate the conduct of trade and the 
use and disposition of property upon the reservation provided that any 
ordinance directly affecting non-members of the reservation shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

f.  To regulate the inheritance or testamentary disposition of property, real, 
and personal, other than allotted lands, within the territory of the Lower 
Brule Sioux Reservation subject to review by the Secretary of Interior.

g.  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and mental 
incompetents by ordinance or resolution, subject to review by the Secretary 
of Interior.

h.  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Council itself and of 
other tribal agencies and tribal officials of the reservation.

i.  To enact resolutions or ordinances consistent with Article II of this 
Constitution governing future membership and the roll of the members of 
the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe.

j.  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of person on the 
Lower Brule Sioux Reservation, and providing for the maintenance of law 
and order and the administration of justice by establishing a reservation 
court and defining its duties and powers. (Amendment IV, September 2, 
1986)

k.  To exclude and remove from the restricted lands of the Lower Brule Sioux 
Reservation persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under ordinances 
which shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

l.  To levy taxes upon members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe and to levy 
taxes or license fees, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, upon 
non-members doing business within the reservation.

m.  As authorized by law, to manage, lease, permit, sell, or otherwise deal 
with tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets; and to purchase or 
otherwise acquire lands or interests in lands within the reservation.

n.  To purchase or acquire, under condemnation proceedings in courts of 
competent jurisdiction, land or other property needed for public purposes, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

o.  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of any tribal lands, 
interest in lands or other tribal assets without the consent of the Tribal 
Council.

p.  To manage any and all economic affairs and enterprises of the Lower 
Brule Sioux Tribe and to engage in any business not contrary to state or 
federal law applicable to Indian Tribes that will further the economic 
development of the tribe or its members and to use tribal funds or other 
tribal resources for such purposes.

q.  To delegate to subordinate boards, cooperative associations which are 
open to all members of the tribe, tribal officers, committees, delegates or 
other tribal groups, any of the foregoing powers reserving the right to 
review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.

r.  To promulgate ordinances prohibiting the sales, exchange, possession of 
any intoxicant on the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation as defined by the Act 
of March 2, 1889. (Amendment VII, September 2, 1986)

s. To establish such tribal corporations as necessary to develop and operate 
Tribal business entities and to delegate such council powers to such 
corporations as necessary to conduct business, reserving the right of 
review of any action taken by virtue of such delegated power, and to rescind 
establishment and delegation of powers. (Amendment IV, September 2, 
1986)

SECTION 2. Manner of Review. Any resolution or ordinance which by terms of 
this Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior shall be 
presented to the Superintendent of the Reservation who shall within 10 days after 
its receipt by him approve or disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution it shall thereupon 
become effective but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, 
bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may within ninety 
(90) days from the date of approval, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for 
any cause, by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or ordinance 
submitted to him, within ten (10) days after its receipt by him he shall advise the

Tribal Council of his reasons therefore. If these reasons appear to the Tribal 
Council insufficient, it may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution 
to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of 
its referral, approve or reject the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance 
or resolution shall be in effect or reject accordingly.

SECTION 3. Future Powers. The Tribal Council of the Lower Brule Sioux 
reservation through appropriate amendment of this Constitution may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Tribal Council by the 
Secretary of the Interior or by any other duly authorized official or agency of the 
government.

SECTION 4. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the 
tribe or Band of the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation but not expressly referred to 
in this Constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by 
the people of the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation through the adoption of 
appropriate bylaws and constitutional amendments.

SECTION 5. When the approval or review by the Secretary of the Interior is 
required of any particular actions of the Tribal Council, the Secretary where 
permitted by law may in writing waive this requirement for such periods as he in 
his sole discretion deems fit.

ARTICLE VII – JUDICIAL

SECTION 1. There shall be a judicial branch comprised of an appellate court, a 
tribal court consisting of one chiefjudge with supportive staff.

SECTION 2. Judges shall be elected by the eligible voters for a term of four (4) 
years subject only to a recall election for cause allowing due process as defined 
by tribal ordinance.

SECTION 3. The procedures for maintenance of law and order and administration 
of justice shall be defined by the tribal council in accordance with Article VI, 
Section 1 of this constitution. (Amendment II and VI, September 2, 1986)

ARTICLE VIII – REFERENDUM

Upon a petition of at least 50% of the eligible voters of the Lower Brule Sioux 
Tribe as defined in Article IV, Section I or upon the request of a majority of the 
Tribal Council, any enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution of the Tribal 
Council shall be submitted to a popular referendum and the vote of a majority of 
the qualified voters voting in such referendum shall be conclusive and binding on 
the Tribal Council.

ARTICLE IX – AMENDMENTS

This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified 
voters of the Tribe voting at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary 
of the Interior provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election but no amendment shall become effective until it shall 
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be the duty of the 
Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed amendment at the 
request of five sixths (5/6) of the Tribal Council, the Chairman thereof having the 
right to vote thereon. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)
 
 

BYLAWS 
OF THE 
LOWER BRULE SIOUX TRIBE

 
 ARTICLE I – DUTIES OF OFFICERS

SECTION 1. Chairman of the Tribal Council. The Chairman of the Tribal Council 
shall preside over all meetings of the Tribal Council, shall perform all duties of a 
Chairman, and exercise any authority delegated to him by the Tribal Council.

SECTION 2. Vice-Chairman of the Tribal Council. The Vice-Chairman of the Tribal 
Council shall assist the Chairman when called upon to do so and in the absence 
of the Chairman shall preside. When so presiding he shall have all the rights, 
privileges, and duties as well as the responsibilities of the Chairman.

SECTION 3. Treasurer of the Tribal Council. The Treasurer of the Tribal Council 
shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve, and safeguard all funds in the custody 
of the Tribal Council, whether same be tribal funds or special funds for which the 
Tribal Council is acting as trustee or custodian. He shall deposit all funds in such 
bank or elsewhere as directed by the Tribal Council and shall make and preserve

a faithful record of such funds and report on all receipts and expenditure and the 
amount of all funds in his possession or custody, such report being made in 
writing to the Tribal Council at regular meetings and such other times as 
requested by the Tribal Council. He shall not payout or otherwise disburse any 
funds in his possession or custody, or in the possession or custody of the Tribal 
Council, except when properly authorized to do so by resolution duly passed by 
the Tribal Council. The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at 
least once each year by a competent auditor employed by the Tribal Council and 
at such times as the Tribal Councilor Assistant Secretary of the Interior may 
direct. He shall be present at all special or regular meetings of the Tribal Council. 
(Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 4. Secretary of the Tribal Council. The Secretary of the Tribal Council 
shall conduct all tribal correspondence and shall keep an accurate record of all 
matters transacted at Tribal Council meetings. It shall be his duty to submit 
promptly to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction and Assistant Secretary of 
Interior copies of all minutes of regular and special meetings of the Tribal 
Council. He shall be present at all special and regular meetings of the Tribal 
Council. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 5. Sergeant at Arms. The Sergeant at Arms shall be present at all 
meetings of the Tribal Council, and shall maintain order within the Tribal Council 
chamber and perform such other duties as may be designated by the Tribal 
Council. He shall serve all summonses emanating from Tribal Council and shall 
make proper return of same.

SECTION 6. Chaplain of the Tribal Council. The Chaplain of the Tribal Council 
shall perform such duties as the Tribal Council may direct.

SECTION 7. Appointive Officers. The duties of all appointive boards or officers of 
the community shall be clearly defined by resolution of the Tribal Council at the 
time of their creation of appointment. Such boards and officers shall report, from 
time to time as required, to the Tribal Council and their activities and decisions 
shall be subject to review by the Tribal Council upon the petition of any person 
aggrieved. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)
 
 

ARTICLE II -DUTIES OF MEMBERS

 
 It shall be the duty of each member of the Tribal Council to make reports to the 
general membership of the Tribe concerning the proceedings of the Tribal 
Council. The Tribal Council shall be responsible for the care and administration 
of all tribal property and equipment under resolutions or ordinances adopted by 
the Tribal Council, such resolutions and ordinances subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)
 
 

ARTICLE III  -COMPENSATION

 
 The officers and members of the Tribal Council shall serve without compensation 
but the Tribal Council may prescribe for each officer and councilman a stipend 
for each regular meeting attended in an amount as deemed appropriate from such 
approved budgeted trust funds. (Amendment II and V, September 2, 1986)
 
 

ARTICLE IV -MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. The regular meeting of the Tribal Council shall be held the first 
Wednesday of each month at the Lower Brule Community Hall or such other 
place on the reservation designated by the Tribal Council. Special meetings may 
be called by the Chairman or by the majority of the Tribal Council and when so 
called the Tribal Council shall have the power to transact business as in regular 
meetings. (Amendment II and V, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 2. Quorum. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is 
present. A quorum shall consist of five (5) council members. (Amendment II and 
V, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 3. Order of Business. The order of business shall be determined by 
resolution of the Tribal Council. (Amendment II and V, September 2, 1986)

SECTION 4. Ordinances and resolutions. All final decisions of the Tribal Council 
on matters of general and permanent interest to the members of the Tribe shall be 
embodied in ordinances. Such ordinances shall be collected and published from 
time to time for the information and education of the members of the Tribe.

All final decisions of the Tribal Council on matters of temporary interest (such as 
action on the reservation budget for a single year, or petitions to Congress or the 
Secretary of Interior) or relating especially to particular individuals or officials 
(such as adoptions of members, instructions for tribal employees or rules of 

order for the Tribal Council) shall be embodied in resolutions. Such resolutions 
shall be recorded in a special book which shall be open to public inspection.
All questions of procedure (such as acceptance of committee reports or 
invitations to outsiders to speak) shall be decided by motion duly passed or by 
the ruling of the Chairman if no objection is heard.

In all instances, resolution, or motions the duly elected councilmen may act by 
two third (2/3) majority vote of the full Tribal Council, but all matters of 
importance shall be fully discussed and a reasonable attempt shall be made to 
secure unanimous agreement. The Chairman shall only vote to break a tie. 
(Amendment II and V, September 2, 1986)
 
 

ARTICLE V - NATIONAL SIOUX COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. The Tribal Council shall have the power to select delegates to sit in 
the National Sioux Councils. (Amendment II, September 2, 1986)
 
 

ARTICLE VI  -ADOPTION

 
 This amended Constitution and Bylaws attached hereto shall be in full force and 
effect whenever a majority of the adult voters of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe 
voting at an election called by the Secretary of the Interior in which at least thirty 
(30) percent of the eligible voters shall vote, shall have ratified such Constitution 
and Bylaws, and the Secretary of the Interior shall have approved same, as 
provided in the Act of June 18, 1934, as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935. 
(Amendment II, September 2, 1986)
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved September 5, 1935, by the Secretary of the 
Interior, the attached constitution and bylaws were submitted for ratification to 
the Indians of the Lower Brule Reservation and were on October 5, 1935, duly 
adopted by a vote 123 for, and 42 against, in an election in which over 30 percent 
(30%) of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of 
the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the 
act of June 15, 1935 (Public, No. 147, 74th Cong.).
 
  
  
 

HARRY BIG EAGLE
 
 Chairman of Election Board 
 

DAN QUILT
 
 Chairman of Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council.
 
 

THOMAS EAGLE THUNDER
 
 Secretary of Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council.

JAMES H. HYDE, 
Superintendent.

I,  Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 
America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Constitution and 
Bylaws of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Reservation.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior Department 
or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be incompatible with 
any of the provisions of the said Constitution or Bylaws, are hereby 
declared inapplicable to the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule 
Sioux Reservation.
All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered to abide 
by the provisions of the said Constitution and Bylaws.

Approval recommended:

A.C. MONOHAN, Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
 
  
 
(SEAL)

 
 HARROLD L. ICKES, Secretary of the Interior
WASHINGTON, D.C., November 27,1935. 
 

PRESENT CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION


Pursuant to an order, approved April 20, 1960, by the Assistant Secretary of the 
Interior, the attached amended Constitution and Bylaws for the Lower Brule Sioux 
Tribe of the Lower Brule Reservations, South Dakota, was submitted for adoption 
to the qualified voters of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule 
Reservation and was on June 14, 1960, duly adopted by a vote of 105 for, and 47 

against, in an election in which at least thirty percent of those entitled to vote cast 
their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935, October 18, 
1935, and March 24, 1938.

J.W. THOMPSON, Chairman, Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council

JOYCE ESTES, Secretary, Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council

C.H. BEITZEL, Superintendent, Pierre Agency, Pierre, South Dakota
 
 

(APPROVAL)

 
 I, Roger Ernst, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 
America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached amended 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule 
Indian Reservation, South Dakota, as adopted by the Indians of the Lower 
Brule Indian Reservation on June 14, 1960.

Approval recommended:

Glen F. Emmons, Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
Roger Ernst, Assistant Secretary of the Interior

WASHINGTON, D.C., July 15,1960.

AMENDMENTS TO 1935 CONSTITUTION 
 
 
CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved December 9, 1941, by the Assistant Secretary of 
the Interior, the attached Amendment to the Constitution and Bylaws for the 
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation, South Dakota, 
was submitted for ratification to the qualified voters of the Tribe, and on February 
4, 1942, was adopted by a vote of 57 for, and 50 against, in an election which 
more than 30 percent (30%) of those entitled to vote cast their ballots in 
accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

DANIEL QUILT, SR. Chairman, Tribal Council

HARVEY BIG EAGLE Secretary, Tribal Council

P.L. HALLMAN, Superintendent, Crow Creek Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 
America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Amendment to the 
Constitution and Bylaws for the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule 
Reservation.

Approval recommended: April 13, 1942.

J.C. MCCASKILL,
Assistant to the Commissioner.

OSCAR L. CHAPMAN, Assistant Secretary
 
 
(SEAL)

 
 WASHINGTON, D.C., May 18,1942.

