 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS FOR THE LOWER BRULE  
 
SIOUX TRIBE

 
 Preamble

We, the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Reservation, 
in order to establish a more perfect tribal organization, promote the 
general welfare, develop better school facilities, conserve and de
velop our lands and resources, and secure to ourselves and our pos
terity the power to exercise certain rights of home rule not inconsist
ent with the Federal, State, and local laws, do ordain and establish 
this constitution for the Lower Brule Tribe.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Lower Brule Tribe of Indians shall extend 
to the territory within the original confines of the Lower Brule Res
ervation boundaries as established by the Act of March 2, 1889, and 
other lands owned by the Lower Brule Tribe outside of the original 
boundaries of the Lower Brule Reservation, and to such other lands 
as may hereafter be added thereto under any law of the United 
States, except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe shall 

consist as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

census roll of the Tribe as of April 1, 1935.

(b)  All children born to any member of the Lower Brule Tribe 
who is a resident of the reservation at the time of the birth of said 
children.

Section 2. The Tribal Council shall have the power to promul
gate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering future membership and the adoption of new members.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Lower Brule Tribe shall 
consist of a CounciL known as the “Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Coun
cil.”

Section 2. This Council shall consist of ten members duly elected 
from the five districts of the Lower Brule Reservation. The voters 
of each district shall elect two members of the Council. The five 
districts of the reservation are designated as follows: Lower Brule, 
Fort Hale, Iron Nation, Cedar Creek, and Fort George. The pres

ent Tribal Council shall designate the boundaries of each district 
prior to the election of the first Council as provided in this consti
tution, and the Council hereafter shall have the authority to change 
the boundaries of the districts provided that no one district shall 
contain less than ten percent (10%) nor more than thirty percent 

of the .total population of the reservation. 

Section 3. The Tribal Council so organized shall elect from within 
or outside of its own number (1) a chairman, (2) a vice chairman, 
(3) a secretary, (4) a treasurer, (5) a sergeant at arms, (6) a chap
lain, and (7) such other officers and committees as may be deemed 
necessary. 

Section 4. The first election of the Tribal Council hereunder shall 
be called and supervised by the present Tribal Council within sixty 
(60) days after the ratification and approval of this Constitution. 
The candidate in each district receiving the highest number of votes 
shall hold office for four years and the candidate in each district 
receiving the next highest number of votes shall hold office for two 
(2) years. Thereafter every two (2) years a councilman shall be 
chosen for each district to represent such a district for a term of 
four (4) years. After the first election, elections for the Tribal 
Council shall be called at least sixty (60) days prior to the expira
tion of the terms of office of. the members of the Tribal Council.

Article IV—Electton and Nomination for the Tribal Council

Section 1.  All enrolled members of the Lower Brule Tribe, twenty- 
one (21) years of age or over, who have maintained a legal resi
dence within the reservation for a period of one (1) year imme
diately prior to any election shall have the right to vote.

Section 2.  The time and places of voting shall be designated by 

the Tribal Council.

Section 3.  All elections shall be by secret ballot.
Section 4. Nomination of candidates for the Tribal Council under 
this Constitution shall be by petition signed by not less than five 
legal voters of the district wherein the candidate may reside. A voter 
may sign only one petition. Petitions for nomination shall be filed 
with the Secretary of the Tribal Council at least thirty (30) days 
prior to the election for which the candidate makes such petition. The 
list of qualified candidates shall be posted by the Secretary of the 
Tribal Council in the respective districts not less than two (2) weeks 
prior to the election.

Section 5. All elections shall be held in accordance with the rules 

and regulations laid down by the Tribal Council.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal from Office

Section 1. If a councilman or official shall die, resign, permanently 
leave the reservation, or shall be found guilty of a felony or misde
meanor involving dishonesty in any Indian, State, or Federal Court, 
the Council shall declare the position vacant and shall appoint a per
son from the district represented to fill the unexpired term.

Section 2. The Tribal Council may by a two-third (2/3) vote expel 

any member for neglect of duty or gross misconduct.

Article VI—Powers of the Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Council of the Lower Brule 
Reservation shall exercise the following powers, subject to any limi
tations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States, and subject further to all express restrictions upon such pow
ers contained in this Constitution and the attached Bylaws.

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, 
on behalf of the tribe and to advise and consult with representa
tives of the Interior Department on all activities of the Department 
that may affect the Lower Brule Reservation.

(6)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the Lower Brule Tribe and its members, the choice 
of the counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encum
brance of tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets which 
may be authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, or any other official or agency of 
government, provided that no tribal lands shall ever be sold, en
cumbered, or leased for a period exceeding five (5) years, except for 
governmental purposes.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Lower Brule Reservation prior to the submission of such estimates 
to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To make assignments of reservation land to members of the 
Lower Brule Sioux Reservation in conformity with Article IX of 
this Constitution.

(f)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Lower 
Brule Reservation in accordance with the terms of a charter to be 
issued to the Lower Brule Reservation by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(g)  To appropriate for public purposes of the reservation any 
available funds, provided that any such appropriation made prior 
to July 1, 1940, shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(h)  To levy taxes upon members of the Lower Brule Tribe and 
to require the performance of community labor in lieu thereof, and 
to levy taxes or license fees, subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior, upon nonmembers doing business within the reserva
tion.

(i)  To exclude from the restricted lands of the Lower Brule Reser
vation persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under ordinances 
which shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(j)  To enact resolutions or ordinances not inconsistent with Arti
cle II of this Constitution governing adopting and abandonment of 
membership, and to keep at all times a correct roll of the members 
of the Lower Brule Tribe.

(k)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members of the Lower Brule Reservation, and providing for the main
tenance of law and order and the administration of justice by estab
lishing a reservation court, and defining its duties and powers.

4

(1)  To purchase, under condemnation proceedings in courts of com
petent jurisdiction, land or other property needed tor public purposes, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(m)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and gen
eral welfare of the Lower Brule Reservation by regulating the conduct 
of trade and the use and disposition of property upon the reservation, 
provided that any ordinance directly affecting nonmembers of the 
reservation shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.
(n)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to regulate the activities of all cooperative associations of mem
bers of the Lower Brule Tribe.

(o)  To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal, 
other than allotted lands, within the territory of the Lower Brule 
Reservation, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe.

(p) 
(q)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinance or resolution, subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(r)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Council 
itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials of the reservation.
(s)  To delegate to subordinate boards or to cooperative associa
tions which are open to all members of the Tribe any of the fore
going powers reserving the right to review any action taken by 
virtue of such delegated power.

Section 2. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance which 
by the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secre
tary of the Interior shall be presented to the Superintendent of the 
Reservation, who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution 
it shall thereupon become effective but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secre
tary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date 
of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, 
by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within ten (10) days after its enact
ment, he shall advise the Lower Brule Council of his reasons there
for. If these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by 
a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary 
of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from the date 
of its enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said 
ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

Section 3. Future Powers.—The Council of the Lower Brule 
Reservation may exercise such further powers as may in the future 
be delegated to the Council by the Secretary of the Interior or by 
any other duly authorized official or agency of government.

Section 4. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Tribe or Band of the Lower Brule Reservation but not 
expressly referred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by 
this article, but may be exercised by the people of the Lower Brule 
Reservation through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and 
constitutional amendments.

5

Article VII—Bill of Rights

Section 1.  Suffrage.—All members of the Tribe over the age 
of twenty-one (21) shall have the right to vote in all reservation 
elections. The residence qualifications established by Article 4 of 
this Constitution shall apply to all elections except elections for 
the amendment of this Constitution and the attached Bylaws.

Section 2.  Economic Rights.—All members of the reservation 
shall be accorded equal opportunities to participate in the economic 
resources and activities of the reservation.

Section 3.  Civil liberties.—All members of the tribe may enjoy 
without hinderance freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, 
assembly, and association.

Section 4. Rights of Accused.—Any member of the Lower Brule 
Tribe accused of any offense shall have the right to a prompt, open, 
and public hearing with due notice of the offense charged, and shall 
be permitted to summon witnesses on his own behalf. Trial by 
jury may be demanded by any prisoner accused of any offense 
punishable by more than thirty (30) days’ imprisonment. Exces
sive bail shall not be required and cruel punishment shall not be 
imposed.

Article VIII—Referendum

Upon a petition of at least one-half (^) of the eligible voters 
of the Lower Brule Tribe or upon the request of a majority of 
the members of the Tribal Council, any enacted or proposed ordi
nance or resolution of the Tribal Council shall be submitted to 
popular referendum and the vote of a majority of the qualified 
voters in such referendum shall be conclusive and binding on the 
Council.

Article IX—Land

Section 1. Allotted Lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands, within the Lower Brule Reservation shall continue to be held 
as heretofore by their present owners. It is recognized that under 
existing law such lands may be condemned for public purposes, such 
as roads, public buildings, or other public improvements, upon 
payment of adequate compensation, by any agency of the State of 
South Dakota or of the Federal Government, or by the Tribe itself. 
It is further recognized that under existing law such lands may be 
inherited by the heirs of the present owner, whether or not they are 
members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe. Likewise it is recognized 
that under existing law the Secretary of the Interior may, in his 
discretion, remove restrictions upon such land, upon application by 
the Indian owner, whereupon the land will become subject to State 
taxes and may then be mortgaged or sold. The right of the indi
vidual Indian to hold or to part with his land, as under existing law, 
shall not be abrogated by anything contained in this Constitution, 
but the owner of restricted land may, with the approval of the Sec
retary of the Interior, voluntarily convey his land to the Lower 
Brule Sioux Tribe either in exchange for a money payment or in 
exchange for an assignment covering the same land or other land, as 
hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Tribal Lands.—The unallotted. lands of the Lower 
Brule Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired 
by the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe or by the United States in trust for 
the Lower Brule Tribe shall be held as tribal lands, and no part of 
such land shall be mortgaged or sold. ‘ Tribal lands shall not be al
lotted to individual Indians but may be assigned to members of the 
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe, or leased, or otherwise used by the Tribe, 
as hereinafter provided. 

Section 3. Leasing of Tribal Lands.—Tribal lands may be leased 
by the Tribal Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, for such periods of time as are permitted by law.
 
 

,

 
 In the leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given, first, to 
Indian cooperative associations and, secondly, to individual Indians 
who are members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe. No lease of tribal 
land to a nonmember shall be made by the Tribal Council unless it 
shall appear that no Indian cooperative association or individual 
member of the Tribe is able and willing to use the land and to pay 
a reasonable fee for such use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the Tribal 
Council with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, in the 
same manner and upon the same terms as leases.

Section 4. Grant of “Standard” Assignments.—In any assign
ment of Tribal lands which are now owned by the Tribe or which here
after may be acquired for the Tribe by the United States or purchased 
by the Tribe out of tribal funds, preference shall be given, first, to 
heads of families which are entirely landless and, secondly, to heads 
of families which have no allotted lands or interests in allotted lands 
but shall have already received assignments consisting of less than an 
economic unit of agricultural land or other land or interest in land of 
equal value, such economic unit to be determined from time to time by 
the Tribal Council.

No allotted member of the Tribe who may hereafter have the re
strictions upon his land removed and whose land may thereafter be 
alienated shall be entitled to receive an assignment of land as a 
landless Indian.

The Tribal Council may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of not to exceed 
five dollars ($5) on approval of an assignment made under this 
section.

Assignments made under this Section shall be for the primary 
purpose of establishing homes for landless Indians, and shall be 
known as “ standard” assignments.

Section 5. Tenure of Standard Assignments.—If any member of 
the Tribe holding a standard assignment of land shall, for a period 
of two (2) years, fail to use the land so assigned or shall use such land 
for any unlawful purpose such assignment may be canceled by the 
Tribal Council after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, and 
the said land may be reassigned in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 4 of this Article.
Upon the death of any Indian holding a “standard” assignment 
his hens or other individuals designated by him, by will or by writ
ten request, shall have preference in the reassignment of the land, 
provided such persons are members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe 
who would be eligible to receive a “ standard ” assignment

7

Section 6. Grant of “Exchange” Assignments.—Any member of 
the Tribe who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land may 
voluntarily transfer his interest in such land to the Tribe in exchange 
for any assignment to the same land or other land of equal value. If 
the assignee prefers he may receive in lieu of a specific tract of land 
a proportionate share in a larger grazing unit.

Assignments made under this Section shall be known as “ex

change” assignments.

Section 7. Leasing of Exchange Assignments.—Exchange assign
ments may be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian coopera
tive associations, to individual members of the Tribe, or, if no individ
ual Indian or Indian cooperative association is able and willing to 
rent the land at a reasonable fee, such assignments may be leased to 
non-Indians in the same manner as allotted lands.

Section 8. Inheritance of Exchange Assignments.—Upon the 
death of the holder of any exchange assignment, such land shall be 
reassigned by the Tribal Council to his heirs or devisees, subject to 
the following conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
is not a member of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe except that a life 
assignment be made to the surviving widower or widow of the 
holder of the assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
already holds more than two sections of grazing land, or other land 
or interests in land of equal value, either under allotment or under 
assignment.

(c)  Such lands may not be subdivided among heirs or devisees 
into units too small for convenient management. No area of grazing 
land shall be subdivided into units smaller than sixty (60) acres, 
and no area of agricultural land shall be subdivided into units 
smaller than two and one-half (2 1/2) acres, except that land used for 
building or other improvements may be divided to suit the con
venience of the parties. Where it is impossible to divide the land 
properly among the eligible heirs or devisees the Tribal Council 
shall issue to such heirs or devisees grazing permits or other inter
ests in tribal lands of the same value as the assignments of the 
decedent.

(d)  If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the pro
visions of Section 4 of this Article.

Section 9. Inheritance of Improvements.- Improvements of any 
character made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and in
herited by members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe or otherwise 
disposed of under such regulations as the Tribal Council shall pro
vide. No permanent improvements shall be removed from the land 
without the consent of the Tribal Council.

Section 10.  Exchange of Assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe by com
mon consent in such manner as the Tribal Council shall designate.

Section 11.  Use of Unassigned Tribal Land.—Tribal funds may be 
used, with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire 
land under the following conditions: 

(a)  Land within the Lower Brule Reservation or adjacent to the 
boundaries thereof which is not now in Indian ownership may be 
purchased by or for the Lower Brule Tribe.

(b)  Restricted land, which is in heirship status at the time of the 
adoption and approval of this Constitution, may be purchased by or 
for the Tribe, with the consent of all the adult heirs'and the legal 
guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as may be 
agreed upon.

(c)  Land owned by any member of the Tribe who is over the age 
of sixty (60) years, or who is physically incapacitated, may be 
transferred by its owner to the Tribe in exchange for a pension of 
not more than twice the usual rental value of the land for the life 
of the pensioner, to be paid out of available tribal funds.

(d)  Land in excess of one hundred and sixty (160) acres owned 
by any member of the Tribe may be purchased by the Tribe, with 
the consent of the owner, payments to be made under such terms as 
may be agreed upon.

(e)  Land owned by any member of the Tribe who desires to leave 
the reservation permanently may be purchased by the Tribe, under 
such terms as may be agreed upon.

Section 13. Method of Making Assignments.—Applications for 
assignments shall be filed with the Secretary of the Council, and 
shall be in writing, setting forth the name of the person or per
sons applying for the land and as accurate a description of the 
land desired as the circumstances shall permit.

Notices of all applications received by the Secretary shall be 
posted by him in the Agency Office and in at least three conspicuous 
places in the district in which the land is located for not less than 
twenty (20) days before action is taken by the Council.

Any member of the Tribe wishing to oppose the granting of an 
assignment shall do so in writing, setting forth his objections, to 
be med with the. Secretary of the Council, and may, if he so desires, 
appear before the Council to present evidence. The Secretary of the 
Council shall furnish the Superintendent or other officers in charge 
of the Agency a complete record of all action taken by the Council 
on applications for assignment of land, and a complete record of 
assignments shall be kept in the Agency Office and shall be open 
for inspection by members of the Tribe.

The Council shall draw up one or more forms for standard and 
exchange assignments, which shall be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

Article X—Amendments

Amendments to the Constitution and Bylaws may be ratified and 

approved in the same manner as this Constitution and Bylaws.

Whenever eight members of the Council shall consider an amend
ment necessary, such amendment shall be duly approved by eight 
or more members of the Council and sent to the Secretary of the 
Interior. It shall then be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior 
to call an election. If at such election the amendment is adopted by 
a majority of the qualified voters of the Tribe voting therein and 

if at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote 
in such election, such amendment shall be submitted to the Secretary 
of the Interior, and if approved by him shall thereupon take effect.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE LOWER BRULE SIOUX TRIBE

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1.  Chairman, of Council.—The Chairman of the Council 
shall preside over all meetings of the Council, shall perform all 
duties of a Chairman, and exercise any authority delegated to him 
by the Council. He shall vote only in case of a tie.

Section 2. Vice Chairman of the Council.—The Vice Chairman of 
the Council shall assist the Chairman when called upon to do so and 
in the absence of the Chairman shall preside. When so presiding 
he shall have all the rights, privileges, and duties as well as the 
responsibilities of the Chairman.

section 3. Secretary of the Council.—The Secretary of the Tribal 
Council shall conduct all tribal correspondence and shall keep an 
accurate record of all matters transacted at Council meetings. It 
shall be his duty to submit promptly to the Superintendent of the 
jurisdiction and Commissioner of Indian Affairs copies of all min
utes of regular and special meetings of the Tribal Council.

Section 4. Treasurer of Council.—The Treasurer of the Tribal 
Council shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve, and safeguard all 
funds in the custody of the Council, whether same be tribal funds 
or special funds for which the Council is acting as trustee or cus
todian. He shall deposit all funds in such bank or elsewhere as 
directed by the Council and shall make and preserve a faithful rec
ord of such funds and shall report on all receipts and expenditures 
and the amount and nature of all funds in his possession or custody, 
such report being made in writing to the Council at regular meetings 
and at such other times as requested by the Council.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his posses
sion or custody, or in the possession or custody of the Tribal Coun
cil, except when properly authorized to do so by resolution duly 
passed by the Council.

The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least 
once each year by a competent auditor employed by the Council 
and at such times as the Council or the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs may direct.

The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to 

the Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

The Treasurer shall be present at all special or regular meetings 

of the Council.

Section 5. Sergeant at Arms.—The Sergeant at Arms shall be 
present at all meetings of the Tribal Council, and shall maintain 
order within the Council chamber and perform such other duties 
as may be designated by the Tribal Council. He shall serve all 
summonses emanating from the Tribal Council and shall make 
proper return on same.

Section 6. Chaplain of the Council.—The Chaplain of the Coun

cil shall perform such duties as the Council may direct.

Section 7. Appointive officers.—The duties of all appointive 
boards or officers of the community shall be clearly defined by reso
lution of the Council at the time of their creation or appointment. 
Such boards and officers shall report, from time to time as required, 
to the Council and their activities and decisions shall be subject to 
review by the Council upon the petition of any person aggrieved.

Article II—Duties of Members

It shall be the duty of each member of the Tribal Council to make 
reports, to the districts from which he was elected, concerning the 
proceedings of the Tribal Council.

Article III—Qualifications of Councilmen

No person shall be candidate for membership in the Tribal Coun
cil unless he shall be a member of the Lower Brule Tribe and shall 
have resided for a period of one (1) year next proceeding the elec
tion in the district of his candidacy and be at least twenty-five (25) 
years of age.

Article IV—Certification of Election

It shall be the duty of the members of the Tribal Council or board 
appointed by them to certify to the election of the duly elected 
Tribal Council members. This shall be done within five (5) days 
after the election.

Article V—Installation of Councilmen

Newly elected members who have been duly certified shall be in
stalled at the first regular meeting of the Tribal Council following 
the election upon subscribing to the following oath: “ I__________ 
do hereby solemnly swear (or affirm) that I shall preserve, 

support, and protect the Constitution of the United States and the 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe to the 
best of my ability, so help me God.”

Article VI—Salaries

The Tribal Council may prescribe such salaries of officers or mem
bers of the Council as it deems advisable, from such funds as may 
be available.

Article VII—Time and Place of Regular Meetings and 
Procedure

Section 1. Meetings.—Regular meetings of the Tribal Council 
shall be held at 2 p. m. on the first Saturday of each month at the 
Lower Brule Agency at a designated building or hall where official 
records will be kept. Special meetings may be called by a written 
notice signed by the Chairman or by a majority of the Tribal Council 
and when so called the Tribal Council shall have the power to 
transact business as in regular meetings.

Section 2.  Quorum.—No business shall be transacted unless a 

quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of eight councilmen.

Section 3.  Order of Business.—The following order of business is 

established for all the meetings:

Call to order by the president.
Roll call.
Ascertainment of a quorum.
Reading the minutes of the last meetings.
Adoption of the minutes by vote or common consent. 
Unfinished business.
New business.
Adjournment.

Section 4. Ordinances and resolutions.—All final decisions of the 
Council on matters of general and permanent interest to the members 
of the Tribe shall be embodied in ordinance. Such ordinances shall 
be collected and published from time to time for the information and 
education of the members of the Tribe.

All final decisions of the Council on matters of temporary interest 
(such as action on the reservation budget for a single year, or peti
tions to Congress or to the Secretary of the Interior) or relating 
especially to particular individuals or officials (such as adoptions of 
members, instructions for tribal employees or rules of order for the 
Council) shall be embodied in resolutions. Such resolutions shall be 
recorded in a special book which shall be open to public inspection.

All questions of procedure (such as acceptance of committee reports 
or invitations to outsiders to speak) shall be decided by motion duly 
passed or by the ruling of the Chairman if no objection is heard.

In all ordinances, resolutions, or motions the duly elected council
men may act by majority vote, but all matters of importance shall be 
fully discussed and a reasonable attempt shall be made to secure 
unanimous agreement.

Section 5. Legislative forms.—Every ordinance shall begin with 

the words: “Be it enacted by the Council of the Lower Brule Tribe.”

Every ordinance or resolution shall contain a recital of the laws of 
the United States and the provisions of the Lower Brule Constitution 
under which authority for the said ordinance or resolution is found.

Article VIII—National Sioux Council

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall have the power to select dele

gates to sit in National Sioux Councils.

Article IX—Adoption

This Constitution and Bylaws attached hereto shall be in full force 
and effect whenever a majority of the adult voters of the Lower Brule 
Sioux Tribe voting at an election called by the Secretary of the Inte
rior in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters shall 
vote, shall have ratified such Constitution and Bylaws, and the Secre
tary of the Interior shall have approved same, as provided in the 
Act of June 18, 1934, as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935.

Certification or Adoption

Pursuant to an order, approved September 5, 1935, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached constitution and bylaws were 
submitted for ratification to the Indians,of the Lower Brule Reserva
tion and were on October 5, 1935, duly adopted by a vote 123 for, 
and 42 against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those 
entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of 
the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (Public, No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Harry Bio Eagle, 
Chairman of Election Board. 
Dan Quilt,
Chairman of Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council.

Secretary of Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council.

Thomas Eagle Thunder, 

James H. Hyde,

Superintendent.

I,  Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and Bylaws of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe 
of the Lower Brule Reservation.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
or Bylaws, are hereby declared inapplicable to the Lower Brule 
Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Reservation.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and Bylaws.

Approval recommended:
A. C. Monahan,

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

[seal] 

Harold L. Ickes,
Secretary of the Interior.

Washington, D. C., November 27,1935.

AMENDMENT—CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE 
 
 
LOWER BRULE SIOUX TRIBE OF THE LOWER BRULE 
RESERVATION 

 
 Amendment.

1.  Article III. Section 2 shell he amended to read:
“The Lower Brule Reservation shall be divided into three districts 
and the members of the Lower Brule Sioux Tribal Council shall be 
duly elected from each of these districts. The voters of each district 
shall elect councilmen to the tribal council in the proportion of one 
representative for each 25 legal voters, or a major fraction thereof; 
Provided, however, That each district shall be entitled to at least one 
councilman. The three districts of the reservation are designated as 
follows: Fort George, which includes that portion of the reservation 
that lies within Stanley County; Iron Nation, which includes all of 
that portion of the reservation which lies between the Stanley-Lyman 
County line and the 10th Guide Meridian, West, but not including 
any of the territory in the Little Bend Area; Lower Brule, which in
cludes all of that portion of the reservation which lies within the Little 
Bend Area and east of the 10th Guide Meridian, West.”

2.  Article III. A new Section 3 shall be inserted between the present 
Section 2 and Section 3 of this Article. The present Section 3 will then 
become Section 4. The new Section shall read as follows:

“The tribal council shall have authority to change the boundaries 
of the three districts enumerated in Section 2 of this article or to 
establish new districts according to future community needs, but in 
either case subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.”
3.  Article III. The present Section 4 shall be amended to read:
“Sec. 5. The members of the present tribal council shall hold office 
until the next regular election at which time all of the terms shall 
expire and new councilmen shall be elected in accordance with Article 
III, Governing Body, as changed by this amendment. The elected 
councilmen shall serve for two years. Elections for the tribal council 
shall be called at least 60 days prior to the expiration of the terms of 
office of the members of the tribal council.”

4.  Article V. A new' section shall be added to this article to read as 

follows:

follows:

“Sec. 3. If a councilman moves away from a district which he 
represents and makes his home off the reservation or in another dis
trict on the reservation for a period of longer than three months, the 
office may be declared vacant by the tribal council, who shall appoint 
a person from the district represented to fill the unexpired term.”

5.  Article IX. Add a new section following Section 10, to read as 

“ Use of Unassigned Tribal Land.—Tribal land which is not assigned, 
including tribal timber reserves, shall be managed by the tribal council 
for the benefit of the members of the entire tribe, and any cash income

AMENDMENTS TO 1935 CONSTITUTION 
 
 
CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved December 9, 1941, by the Assistant Secretary of 
the Interior, the attached Amendment to the Constitution and Bylaws for the 
Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Sioux Reservation, South Dakota, 
was submitted for ratification to the qualified voters of the Tribe, and on February 
4, 1942, was adopted by a vote of 57 for, and 50 against, in an election which 
more than 30 percent (30%) of those entitled to vote cast their ballots in 
accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

DANIEL QUILT, SR. Chairman, Tribal Council

HARVEY BIG EAGLE Secretary, Tribal Council

P.L. HALLMAN, Superintendent, Crow Creek Agency.

I,  Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 
America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Amendment to the 
Constitution and Bylaws for the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule 
Reservation.

Approval recommended: April 13, 1942.

J.C. MCCASKILL,
Assistant to the Commissioner.

OSCAR L. CHAPMAN, Assistant Secretary
 
 
(SEAL)

 
 WASHINGTON, D.C., May 18,1942.

derived from such land shall accrue to the benefit of the tribe as a 
whole.”

6.  Article IX. The present Section 11 shall become Section 12 and 

shall have the following heading:

“Sec. 12. Purchase of Land by the Tribe.—Tribal funds may be 
used with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior to acquire land 
Tinder the following conditions:

“ (a) Land within the Lower Brule Reservation or adjacent to the 
boundaries thereof which is not now in Indian ownership may be 
purchased by or for the Lower Brule Tribe.

“(b) Restricted land which is in heirship status at the time of the 
adoption and approval of this Constitution, may be purchased by or 
for the Tribe, with the consent of all the adult heirs and the legal 
guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as may be 
agreed upon.

“(c) Land owned by any member of the Tribe who is over the age 
of sixty (60) years, or who is physically incapacitated, may be trans
ferred by its owner to the Tribe in exchange for a pension of not more 
than twice the usual rental value of the land for the life of the pen
sioner, to be paid out of available tribal funds.

“(d) Land in excess of one hundred and sixty (160) acres owned by 
any member of the Tribe may be purchased by the Tribe, with the 
consent of the owner, payments to be made under such terms as may 
be agreed upon.

“(e) Land owned by any member of the Tribe who desires to leave 
the reservation permanently may be purchased by the Tribe, under 
such terms as may be agreed upon.”

7.  Article X. The first sentence in the second paragraph of this 

article shall be changed to read:

“Whenever two-thirds (2/3) or more of the elected councilmen 
shall consider an amendment necessary, such amendment shall be 
duly approved by two-thirds (2/3) or more of the elected councilmen 
and sent to the Secretary of the Interior.”

8.  Article I of the By-laws. The fourth paragraph of Section 4 of 

this article shall be changed to read:

“When, in the opinion of the tribal council or the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs, there are sufficient funds in the custody of the tribal 
council to warrant it, the Treasurer shall be required to give a bond 
satisfactory to the tribal council and to the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.”

9.  Article VII of the By-laws. The first sentence of Section 1 of 

this article shall be changed to read:

“Section 1. Meetings.—The regular meeting of the tribal council 
shall be held once each month at the Lower Brule Agency. The day 
of the month and the opening hour of the meeting shall be left to the 
discretion of the tribal council.”

10.  Article VII of the By-laws. The second sentence of Section 2 

of this article shall be changed to read:

“A  quorum shall consist of at least two-thirds (2/3) of the elected 

councilmen.”

Pursuant to an order, approved December 9, 1941, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment to the Constitution
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 and By-laws for the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Res
ervation, South Dakota, was submitted for ratification to the qualified 
voters of the Tribe, and on February 4, 1942, was adopted by a vote 
of 57 for, and 50 against, in an election in which more than 30 percent 
of those entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with section 16 
of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

P. L. Hallam,

Superintendent, Crow Creek Agency.

Daniel Quilt, Sr. 
Chairman, Tribal Council. 
Harvey Big Eagle, 
Secretary, Tribal Council.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary' of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Amendment to the Constitution and By-laws 
for the Lower Brule Sioux Tribe of the Lower Brule Reservation.

Approval recommended: April 13,1942.
J. C. McCaskill,

Assistant to the Commissioner.

Washington, D. C., May 18,194&1 

[seal]

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary.

O 40Y1RNWIRT MINTIN4 OFPICIi IHI

