State of Washington 
County of Whatcom

I attest that the attached:

Constitution and Bylaws of the 
Lummi Tribe of the Lummi Reservation, Washington

dated April 10, 1970 
signed by the 
Acting commissioner of Indian Affairs, James F. Canan, 
consisting of 12 pages

is a true and correct copy of a document in the possession of 
Lummi Indian Business council.

Dated: March 19, 1993

Signature of Notary Public

My appointment expires July 1, 1995
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 
LUMMI TRIBE OF THE LUMMI RESERVATION, WASHINGTON

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Lummi Tribe of Indians of the Lummi Reserva
tion in the State of Washington, in order to make the tribal 
government, established by the constitution and bylaws approved 
April 2, 1948, more responsive to the tribe, to develop our 
community resources, administer justice, protect our tribal 
interests, and promote the economic and social welfare of ourselves 
and our descendants, and to preserve our land base, culture, and 
identity, do hereby establish this constitution and bylaws, which 
shall revoke and replace said constitution and bylaws approved 
April 2, 1948, and shall henceforth constitute the governing 
document of the Lummi Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Lummi Tribe shall extend to the territorial 
boundaries of the Lummi Reservation as established by the Treaty 
of January 22, 1855, and by Executive Order of November 11, 1873, 
and to such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto. However, 
nothing in this article shall be construed as restricting the 
treaty hunting and fishing rights of members, including the right 
to hunt and fish in usual and accustomed places.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Lummi Tribe shall consist of the 
following:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on 
the Official Census Roll of the Tribe as of 
January 1, 1942, provided that such roll may be 
corrected by the Lummi Business Council with the 
approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

(b)  Any persons of Indian blood who were residents of 

the reservation on January 1, 1947, and whose names 
would have been placed on a census roll of that 
date had one been prepared.
 
 

 
 
 (c)  All other persons of Indian blood resident on the 

reservation at any time between January 1, 1942, 
and the effective date of this constitution, who 
were accepted by the general council as members 
of the Lummi Tribe.

(d)  All children born between January 1, 1942, and 

the effective date of this constitution, to any 
member of the tribe who was living on the Lummi 
Reservation at the time of the birth of said child.

(e)  All children of one-fourth (1/4) degree or more 

Indian blood born between January 1, 1942, and the 
effective date of this constitution, to any member 
of the tribe not living on the reservation at the 
time of the birth of said child.

(f)  All children of one-fourth (1/4) degree or more 

Indian blood born to any member of the tribe 
after the effective date of this constitution.

Sec. 2. The Lummi Business Council shall have the power to pass 
ordinances subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs, governing future membership, abandonment of membership, 
and the adoption of new members, provided that all adoptions must 
be approved by the general council.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The general council shall consist of the entire voting 
membership of the Lummi Tribe when it is convened officially for 
official business. The annual general council meeting shall be 
called during the first week of January, provided that special 
meetings shall be called by majority vote of the business council 
or upon the request, in writing, of twenty voting members of the 
tribe. Public notices of all special general council meetings 
shall be made at least ten (10) days prior to such meetings. It 
shall also be rhe duty of the chairman to make a report at the 
annual general council meeting of the activities of the business 
council throughout the past year and to outline proposed plans 
for future economic and social betterment of the tribe.

Sec. 2. Voter Qualifications. Any member of the Lummi Tribe, 
twenty-one (21) years of age, or over, who has maintained legal 
residence on the reservation or within the boundaries of- Whatcom 
County, Washington, for at least six (6) months immediately preceding 
any election, shall be qualified to vote on all matters before the 
general council meetings.

Sec. 3. The duties- of the general council shall consist of but 
need not be limited to the following:

(a)  Act on all adoptions recommended by the business 
council, as provided in Section 2, Article II of 
this constitution;

(b)  Review the actions of the business council at the 

annual meeting;

(c)  Recommend actions to be taken by the business 

council;

(d)  Appoint a committee to certify all elections to the 

business council;

(e)  Consider the recall of members of the business 

council, as provided in Section 2, Article V, and 
consider all referendums, as provided in Article VII 
of this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Lummi Tribe shall be a 
business council consisting of eleven (11) members duly elected 
to serve for a three-year term, as provided in Section 4 of this 
Article, provided that a minimum of seven (7) members must live on 
the reservation.

Sec. 2. Qualifications. Any eligible voter shall be qualified to 
serve as a member of the Lummi Business Council, provided that he 
has been living within the boundaries of Whatcom County, Washington 
for at least one (1) year immediately preceding any election, and 
complies with Section 1 of this Article.

Sec. 3. Selection of Officers. The business council so organized 
shall, on a yearly basis, elect from within its own number: (1) a 
chairman, (2) a vice-chairman, (3) a secretary, and (4) a treasurer, 
and may appoint or employ such other officers or committees as may 
be necessary.

Sec. 4. Election of Business Council Members. After the ratifica
tion and approval of this constitution and bylaws, the first business 
council under this constitution shall be the council existing under 
the 1948 constitution. Members of that body shall draw lots in 
order that the terms of office of the present members can be deter
mined for one, two, or three years, and thereafter an election 
shall be held at the next regular general council meeting for the 
positions held by the three councilmen who drew the one-year lots, 
with an election of these three positions every three years there
after. In the other years, four councilmen shall be elected at 
the regular general council meeting, first for the positions held 
by the four councilmen who drew the two-year lots and then for the 
positions held by the four councilmen who drew the three-year lots.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND RECALL

 
 Section 1. Vacancy. If any member of the business council shall 
die, resign, or move outside the boundaries of Whatcom County, or 
shall be found guilty of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving dis
honesty in any Indian, State, or Federal court, a vacancy in his 
office shall automatically be created, and at its next regular or 
special meeting, the business council shall appoint a person quali
fied pursuant to Article IV to fill the office until the next 
annual general council meeting, at which time a successor shall be 
elected pursuant to Article IV, to fill the office for the balance 
of the unexpired term, provided that whether vacancies are filled 
by appointment or election, the number of council members required 
to live on the reservation pursuant to Section 1, Article IV, shall 
be maintained.

If a business council member changes his residence from the reserva
tion to elsewhere within Whatcom County during his term of office, 
and if such move results in less than the number of business council 
members required to live on the reservation by Section 1, Article IV, 
that council member's position shall automatically become vacant 
and shall be filled pursuant to this section.

Sec. 2. Recall. The members of the general council shall have 
the power to initiate recall of any member of the business council 
by filing a petition with the secretary of the business council, 
signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of 
those voting at the last regular general council meeting, asking 
for the recall of said member of the business council; or, the 
business council may, by majority vote, initiate recall of any 
councilman for neglect of duty or gross misconduct, provided that 
in neither procedure shall a person be recalled except at a special 
meeting of the general council called for that purpose within 
thirty days after the business council action or the filing of the 
voter petition, provided that he shall be given in writing a state
ment of the charges against him at least ten (10) days prior to 
the general council meeting, provided further, that he shall be 
given an opportunity to answer any and all charges. A two-thirds 
(2/3) majority vote of those attending the meeting shall be required 
to effect recall. The general council’s decision shall be final.

Sec. 3. Unexcused Absence. Any councilman who shall absent him
self from three (3) successive meetings without being excused for 
cause, shall forfeit all rights to his office.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Lummi Business Council shall have the following 
powers, subject to any limitation imposed by Federal statutes or 
by the Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To administer all tribal property and assets, by 

ordinance where required;

(b)  To borrow money from the Federal Government, or 

other sources, and to direct the use of such funds 
for productive purposes, or loan money to members 
of the Lummi Tribe, as defined in Article II;

(c)  To collect and expend any Lummi tribal funds within 

the exclusive control of the tribe, and to recommend 
the expenditure of any other tribal funds;

(d)  To purchase or lease in the name of the Lummi 

Indian Tribe any land or other property the 
council may deem beneficial to said Lummi Tribe;

(e)  To enforce regulations contained in approved tribal 

resolutions and ordinances for the protection of 
tribal property, fish and wild life, and other.  .
natural resources of the Lummi Tribe;

(f)  (1) To levy assessments or license fees on

nonmembers doing business or obtaining 
special privileges within the reservation, 
subject to the approval of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs.

(2)  To promulgate rules and regulations and 

enforce assessments or license fees on 
members exercising special privileges or 
profiting on general resources from 
tribal property;

(g)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments 

on behalf of the tribe;

(h)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and 

fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the 

 Commissioner of Indian Affairs;

(i)  To prevent the sale of tribal lands or interests 

in tribal lands without the consent of the general 
council;

(j)  To exclude from the restricted land of the Lummi 

Reservation persons not legally entitled to reside 
therein, under ordinances which shall be subject 
to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs;

(k)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall 
be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs, governing the conduct of members of 
the Lummi Tribe, and providing for the maintenance 
of law and order and the administration of justice 
by establishing a reservation court and defining its 
duties and powers;

(l)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, 
and general welfare of the Lummi Reservation by 
regulating the conduct of trade and the use and 
disposition of property upon the reservation, pro
vided that ordinances directly affecting nonmembers 
of the tribe shall be subject to approval of the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs;

(m)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of 

the business council itself and subordinate tribal 
organizations, and tribal officials over whom it 
has jurisdiction;

(n)  To promote public health and education, encourage 

Indian handicrafts, the administration of charity, 
the conservation and utilization of natural 
resources, and such other services which may 
contribute to the social advancement of the tribe;

(o)  To make rules and procedures not inconsistent with 

the provisions of this constitution governing all 
tribal elections, which shall, among other things, 
provide for secret balloting;

(p)  to delegate to subordinate boards or to cooperative 

associations which are open to all members of the 
tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such 
delegated powers, provided that all final action 
must be taken by the business council.

Sec. 2. Future Powers. The Lummi Business Council may exercise 
such further powers as may, in the future, be delegated to the 
business council.

Sec. 3. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the tribe but not expressly referred to in this constitution 
shall not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the 
people of the Lummi Reservation through the adoption of appropriate 
bylaws and constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII  - REFERENDUM

 
 Upon receipt of a petition of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of 
the voting membership of the tribe, or upon the request of the 
majority of the full membership of the business council, the chair
man shall call a special meeting of the general council to be held 
within thirty (30) days of receipt of such petition or request, to 
consider any enacted or proposed ordinances or resolutions, and the 
vote of the majority of the voting membership attending the special 
meeting will decide whether the enacted or proposed ordinances or 
resolutions shall thereafter be in effect, provided that twenty-five 
percent (25%) or more of the eligible voters shall vote in such 
referendum. Public notices of all special meetings shall be made 
in accordance with Section 1, Article III.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 All members of the Lummi Indian Tribe shall be accorded equal 
rights pursuant to tribal law. No member shall be denied any of 
the rights or guarantees enjoyed by non-Indian citizens under the 
Constitution of the United States, including, but not limited to, 
freedom of religion and conscience, freedom of speech, the right 
to orderly association or assembly, the right to petition for 
action or the redress of grievances, and due process of law. No 
member shall be denied any of the rights or guarantees as provided 
in Title II of Public Law 90-284 — the Act of April 11, 1968 (82 
Stat. 77 and 78) as follows:

No Indian tribe in exercising powers of self-government shall —

(1)  make or enforce any law prohibiting the free 

exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of 
speech, or of the press, or the right of the people 
peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress 
of grievances;

(2)  violate the right of the people to be secure in 

their persons, houses, papers, and effects against 
unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue 
warrants, but upon probable cause, supported by 
oath or affirmation, and particularly describing 
the place to be searched and the person or thing 
to be seized;

(3)  subject any person for the same offense to be twice 

put in jeopardy;

(4)  compel any person in any criminal case to be a 

witness against himself;

(5)  take any private property for a public use without 

just compensation;

(6)  deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the 

right to a speedy and public trial, to be informed 
of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be 
confronted with the witnesses against him, to have 
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his 
favor, and at his own expense to have the 
assistance of counsel for his defense;

(7)  require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, 

inflict cruel and unusual punishments, and in no 
event impose for conviction of any one offense any 
penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment 
for a term of six months or a fine of $500, or both;

(8)  deny to any person within its jurisdiction the 

equal protection of its laws or deprive any person 
of liberty or property without due process of law;

(9)  pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or

(10)  deny to any person accused of an offense punishable 
by imprisonment the right, upon request, to a 
trial by jury of not less than six persons.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a two-thirds (2/3) 
vote of those voting at an election authorized for that purpose by 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, provided that at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such an 
election. No amendment shall become effective until it shall have 
been approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs to 
authorize an election upon presentation of a request by a two-thirds 
(2/3) vote of the members of the business council present at a duly 
convened meeting or upon receipt of a petition signed by thirty 
(30) eligible voters of the tribe.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE LUMMI TRIBE

ARTICLE I - THE BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The chairman of the business council shall preside over 
all business and general council meetings of the tribe. He shall 
be allowed to vote only in case of a tie. He shall exercise any 
authority specifically delegated to him by the business council.

Sec. 2. The vice-chairman of the business council shall assist 
the chairman when called upon to do so. In the absence of the 
chairman, he shall preside, and when so presiding, have all the 
rights, privileges, and duties, as well as the responsibilities, 
of the chairman.

Sec. 3. The secretary shall prepare all tribal correspondence and 
shall not sign notices or documents unless authorized by the 
business council. It shall be the duty of the secretary to keep a 
complete and accurate record of all matters transacted at council 
meetings and to submit copies of minutes of all meetings of the 
business council and general council to the Western Washington Agency.

Sec. 4. The treasurer shall have custody of and be responsible 
for all funds in the custody of the business council. The treasurer 
shall deposit all such funds in such federally insured banks or 
elsewhere as directed by the business council and shall keep 
proper records of such funds. The treasurer shall report on all 
receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds 
on hand at the annual general council meeting and upon request of 
the business council. The treasurer shall not pay out any funds 
except when authorized to do so by the business council and all 
checks must be signed by the treasurer. The business council shall 
decide when the amount of funds being handled by the treasurer has 
become large enough to justify the need for an annual audit. It 
shall then require that the books and records of the treasurer 
shall be audited by either a competent auditor or by a Federal 
employee appointed by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs or his 
authorized representative. The treasurer will be required to have 
a surety bond satisfactory to the business council and the 
Superintendent of the Western Washington Agency. The surety bond 
will be obtained at the expense of the tribe.

Sec. 5 Appointive Officers. The duties of all appointive 
committees and officers appointed by the business council shall be 
clearly defined by resolution of the business council at the time 
of their creation or appointment. Such committees or officers 
shall report from time to time, as required, to the business 
council and their activities and decisions shall be subject to 
review by the business council upon petition of any person aggrieved.
 
 

ARTICLE II - INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS AND COUNCIL MEMBERS

 
 Newly elected members who have been duly certified shall be 
installed thereafter at the next regular meeting of the business 
council. Each member of the business council and each officer or 
subordinate officer, elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an 
oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath 
he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of 
the United States and this constitution and bylaws.

Oath: "I,--- ----—---------- , do solemnly swear that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States and the 
constitution of the Lummi Tribe; that I will carry out, faithfully 
and impartially, the duties of my office to the best of my ability; 
that I will cooperate, promote, and protect the best interests of 
my tribe, in accordance with its constitution and bylaws."
 
 

ARTICLE III  - TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

 
 Section 1. Regular meetings of the business council shall be held 
on the first Friday of each month. The date of regular meetings 
may be changed by resolution of the business council. Meetings 
shall be held at the business office or such other places as the 
business council may designate from time to time. Special meetings 
may be called by written notice to all councilmen, signed by the 
chairman, or by a majority of the business council, and when so 
called by written notice to all councilmen, the business council 
shall have power to transact business as in a regular meeting.

Sec. 2. The annual election and general council meeting shall be 
held during the first week in January of each year, or at such 
other time as the business council determines.

Sec. 3. Quorum. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum 
is present. A quorum of the business council shall consist of 
six (6) members of that council. A quorum of the general council 
shall consist of twenty-five (25) eligible voters; provided, however, 
that the lack of a quorum shall not be cause for postponing the 
annual election of tribal officials.

Sec. 4. The order of business for all meetings is that established 
in Robert's Rules of Order, Revised Edition.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of 
the adult voters of the Lummi Tribe, voting at a special election 
authorized by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs in which at least 
thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall 
be submitted to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs for his approval. 
It shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, James F. Caran, ACTING

 Commissioner of Indian Affairs do

hereby approve the foregoing Constitution and bylaws of the Lummi 

Tribe of the Lummi Reservation, Washington, as provided for in 

Article IV of the bylaws - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

of said document.

Washington, D. C. 

Date:


CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE LUMMI TRIBE OF THE LUMMI 
RESERVATION, WASHINGTON
AS AMENDED

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Lummi Tribe of Indians of the Lummi Reservation in the State of 
Washington, in order to make the tribal government, established by the constitution and bylaws 
approved April 10, 1970, more responsive to the tribe, to develop our community resources, 
administer justice, protect our tribal interests, and promote the economic and social welfare of 
ourselves and our descendants, and to preserve our land base, culture, and identity, do hereby 
establish this constitution and bylaws, which shall revoke and replace said constitution and 
bylaws approved April 2, 1948, and shall henceforth constitute the governing document of the 
Lummi Tribe.
[Amended: Resolution #98-23, March 6, 1998.]
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Lummi Nation shall extend to: (a) all lands, waters and other resources 
within the territorial boundaries of the Lummi Reservation as established by the Treaty of 
January 22, 1855 and added to the Lummi Reservation by the Executive Order of November 11, 
1873; (b) all lands, waters and other resources as may be hereafter added to the Lummi 
Reservation; (c) all lands, waters and other resources owned by the Lummi Nation or held in 
trust for the Nation or its members; (d) persons and activities within or affecting the lands, 
waters, and other resources subject to the Nation’s jurisdiction; (e) the exercise of treaty reserved 
rights, including but not limited to, fishing, hunting and gathering; (f) all cultural property, 
resources and activities of the Lummi People; (g) all members or individuals eligible for 
membership in the Lummi Nation and their descendents.
[Amended: Resolution #2006-019, February 7, 2006]
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. 

The membership of the Lummi Tribe shall consist of the following:

(a) 

(b) 

All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the Official Census Roll of
the Tribe as of January 1, 1942, provided that such roll may be corrected by the 
Lummi Business Council with the approval of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

Any person of Indian blood who were residents of the reservation on January 1, 
1947, and whose names would have been placed on a census roll of that date had 
one been prepared.

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

All other persons of Indian blood resident on the reservation at any time between 
January 1, 1942, and the effective date of this constitution, who were accepted by 
the general council as members of the Lummi Tribe.

All children bom between January 1, 1942, and the effective date of this 
constitution, to any member of the tribe who was living on the Lummi 
Reservation at the time of the birth of said child.

All children of one-fourth (1/4) degree or more Indian blood bom between 
January 1, 1942, and effective date of this constitution, to any member of the tribe 
not living on the reservation at the time of the birth of said child.

All children of one-fourth (1/4) degree or more Indian blood bom to any member 
of the tribe after the effective date of this constitution.

Sec. 2. The Lummi Business Council shall have the power to pass ordinances subject to 
the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, governing future membership, abandonment 
of membership, and the adoption of new members, provided that all adoptions must be approved 
by the general council.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The general council shall consist of the entire voting membership of the Lummi 
Tribe when it is convened officially for official business. The annual general council meeting 
shall be called during the first week of January, provided that special meetings shall be called by 
majority vote of the business council or upon the request, in writing, of twenty voting members 
of the tribe. Public notices of all special general council meetings shall be made at least ten (10) 
days prior to such meetings. It shall also be the duty of the chairman to make a report at the 
annual general council meeting of the activities of the business council throughout the past year 
and to outline proposed plans for future economic and social betterment of the tribe.

Sec. 2. Voter Qualifications. Any member of the Lummi Tribe, eighteen (18) years of 
age, or over, who has maintained legal residence on the reservation or within the boundaries of 
Whatcom County, Washington, for at least six (6) months immediately preceding any election, 
shall be qualified to vote on all matters before the general council meetings.
[Amended: Resolution #98-23, March 6, 1998.]

Sec. 3. The duties of the general council shall consist of but need not be limited to the 
following:

(a) 

Act on all adoptions recommended by the business council, as provided in Section 
2, Article II of this constitution;

(b) 

Review the actions of the business council at the annual meeting;

(c) 

Recommend actions to be taken by the business council;

(d) 

Appoint a committee to certify all elections to the business council;

(e) 

Consider the recall of members of the business council, as provided in Section 2, 
Article V, and consider all referendums, as provided in Article VII of this 
constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The governing body of the Lummi Tribe shall be a business council consisting of 
eleven (11) members duly elected to serve for a three-year term, as provided in Section 4 of this 
Article, provided that a minimum of seven (7) members must live on the reservation.

Sec. 2. Qualifications. Any eligible voter shall be qualified to serve as a member of the 
Lummi Business Council, provided that he has been living within the boundaries of Whatcom 
County, Washington for at least one (1) year immediately preceding any election, and complies 
with Section 1 of this Article.

Sec. 3. Selection of Officers. The business council so organized shall, on a yearly basis,
elect from within its own number: (1) a chairman, (2) a vice-chairman, (3) a secretary, and (4) 
a treasurer, and may appoint or employ such other officers or committees as may be necessary.

Sec. 4. Election of Business Council Members. After the ratification and approval of 
this constitution and bylaws, the first business council under this constitution shall be the council 
existing under the 1948 constitution. Members of that body shall draw lots in order that the 
terms of office of the present members can be determined for one, two, or three years, and 
thereafter an election shall be held at the next regular general council meeting for the positions 
held by the three councilmen who drew the one-year lots with an election of these three positions 
every three years thereafter. In the other years, four councilmen shall be elected at the regular 
general council meeting, first for the positions held by the four councilmen who drew the two- 
year lots and then for the positions held by the four councilmen who drew the three-year lots.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - VACANCIES AND RECALL

 
 Section 1. Vacancy. If any member of the business council shall die, resign, or move 
outside the boundaries of Whatcom County, or shall be found guilty of a felony, or a 
misdemeanor involving dishonesty in any Indian, State, or Federal court, a vacancy in his office 
shall automatically be created, and at its next regular or special meeting, the business council 
shall appoint a person qualified pursuant to Article IV to fill the office until the next annual 
general council meeting, at which time a successor shall be elected pursuant to Article IV, to fill 
the office for the balance of the unexpired term, provided that whether vacancies are filled by 
appointment or election, the number of council members required to live on the reservation 
pursuant to Section 1, Article IV, shall be maintained.

If a business council member changes his residence from the reservation to elsewhere within 
Whatcom County during his term of office, and if such move results in less than the number of 
business council members required to live on the reservation by Section 1, Article IV, that 
council member’s position shall automatically become vacant and shall be filled pursuant to this 
section.

Sec. 2. Recall. The members of the general council shall have the power to initiate 
recall of any member of the business council by filing a petition with the secretary of the 
business council signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the number of those voting at 
the last regular general council meeting, asking for the recall of said member of the business 
council; or, the business council may, by majority vote, initiate recall of any councilman for 
neglect of duty or gross misconduct, provided that in neither procedure shall a person be recalled 
except at a special meeting of the general council called for that purpose within thirty days after 
the business council action or the filing of the voter petition, provided that he shall be given in 
writing a statement of the charges against him at least ten (10) days prior to the general council 
meeting, provided further, that he shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all charges. 
A two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of those attending the meeting shall be required to effect recall. 
The general council’s decision shall be final.

Sec. 3. Unexcused Absence. Any councilman who shall absent himself from three (3) 
successive meetings without being excused for cause, shall forfeit all rights to his office.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Lummi Business Council shall have the following powers, subject to any 
limitation imposed by Federal statutes or by the Constitution of the United States:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

To administer all tribal property and assets, by ordinance where required;

To borrow money from the Federal Government, or other sources, and to direct 
the use of such funds for productive purposes, or loan money to members of the 
Lummi Tribe, as defined in Article II;

To collect and expend any Lummi tribal funds within the exclusive control of the 
tribe, and to recommend the expenditure of any other tribal funds;

To purchase or lease in the name of the Lummi Indian Tribe any land or other 
property the council may deem beneficial to said Lummi Tribe;

To enforce regulations contained in approved tribal resolutions and ordinances for 
the protection of tribal property, fish and wild life, and other natural resources of 
the Lummi Tribe;

(1) To levy assessments or license fees on nonmembers doing business or
obtaining special privileges within the reservation, subject to the approval of the 
Lummi Nation General Council.

[Amended: Resolution #97-38, February 11, 1997.]

To promulgate rules and regulations and enforce assessments or license 
(2) 
fees on members exercising special privileges or profiting on general resources 
from tribal property;

(g) 

To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments on behalf of the tribe;

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

(k) 

(1) 

(m) 

(n) 

(o) 

To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to 
the approval of the Lummi Nation General Council;
[Amended: Resolution #97-38, February 11, 1997.]

To prevent the sale of tribal lands or interests in tribal lands without the consent 
of the general council;

To exclude from the restricted land of the Lummi Reservation persons not legally 
entitled to reside therein, under ordinances which shall be subject to the approval 
of the Lummi Nation General Council;
[Amended: Resolution #97-38, February 11, 1997.]

To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject to the approval of 
the Lummi Nation General Council, governing the conduct of members of the 
Lummi Tribe, and providing for the maintenance of law and order and the 
administration of justice by establishing a reservation court and defining its duties 
and powers;
[Amended: Resolution #97-38, February 11, 1997.]

To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and general welfare of the 
Lummi Reservation by regulating the conduct of trade and the use and disposition 
of property upon the reservation, provided that ordinances directly affecting 
nonmembers of the tribe shall be subject to approval of the Lummi Nation 
General Council;
[Amended: Resolution #97-38, February 11, 1997.]

To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the business council itself and 
subordinate tribal organizations, and tribal officials over whom it has jurisdiction;

To promote public health and education, encourage Indian handicrafts, the 
administration of charity, the conservation and utilization of natural resources, 
and such other services which may contribute to the social advancement of the 
tribe;

To make rules and procedures not inconsistent with the provisions of this 
constitution governing all tribal elections, which shall, among other things, 
provide for secret balloting;

(p) 

to delegate to subordinate boards or to cooperative associations which are open to 
all members of the tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to 
review any action taken by virtue of such delegated powers, provided that all final 
action must be taken by the business council.

Sec. 2. 
powers as may, in the future, be delegated to the business council.

Future Powers. 

The Lummi Business Council may exercise such further

Reserved Powers. 

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the tribe but not
Sec. 3. 
expressly referred to in this constitution shall not be abridged by this article, but may be 
exercised by the people of the Lummi Reservation through the adoption of appropriate bylaws 
and constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - REFERENDUM

 
 Upon receipt of a petition of at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the voting membership of the 
tribe, or upon the request of the majority of the full membership of the business council, the 
chairman shall call a special meeting of the general council to be held within thirty (30) days of 
receipt of such petition or request, to consider any enacted or proposed ordinances or resolutions, 
and the vote of the majority of the voting membership attending the special meeting will decide 
whether the enacted or proposed ordinances or resolutions shall thereafter be in effect, provided 
that twenty-five percent (25%) or more of the eligible voters shall vote in such referendum. 
Public notices of all special meetings shall be made in accordance with Section 1, Article III.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII  - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 All members of the Lummi Indian Tribe shall be accorded equal rights pursuant to tribal law. 
No member shall be denied any of the rights or guarantees enjoyed by non-Indian citizens under 
the Constitution of the United States, including, but not limited to, freedom of religion and 
conscience, freedom of speech, the right to orderly association or assembly, the right to petition 
for action or the redress of grievances, and due process of law. No member shall be denied any 
of the rights or guarantees as provided in Title II of Public Law 90-284 - the Act of April 11, 
1968 (82 Stat. 77 and 78) as follows:

No Indian Tribe in exercising powers of self-government shall —

(1) 

(2) 

make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging the 
freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances;

violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and 
effects against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

(3) 

subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

(4) 

compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;

(5) 

take any private property for a public use without just compensation;

(6) 

(7) 

deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial, 
to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with 
the witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in 
his favor, and at his own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual 
punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense any 
penalty or punishment greater than authorized by the Indian Civil Rights Act, 
Title II of Public Law 90-284, as amended from time to time;
[Amended: Resolution #2001-022, February 6, 2001.]

(8) 

deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or 
deprive any person of liberty or property without due process of law;

(9) 

pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or

(10) 

deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the right, 
upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than six persons.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the General Council 
voting at an election called for that purpose, provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
General Council entitled to vote shall vote in such an election.

It shall be the duty of the Lummi Indian Business Council to call an election upon a two-thirds 
(2/3) vote of the members of the business council present at a duly convened meeting or upon 
receipt of a petition signed by thirty (30) eligible voters of the General Council of the tribe.
[Amended: Resolution #96-28, February 8, 1996.]
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE LUMMI TRIBE

ARTICLE I - THE BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The chairman of the business council shall preside over all business and general 
council meetings of the tribe. He shall be allowed to vote only in case of a tie. He shall exercise 
any authority specifically delegated to him by the business council.

Sec. 2. The vice-chairman of the business council shall assist the chairman when called 
upon to do so. In the absence of the chairman, he shall preside, and when so presiding, have all 
the rights, privileges, and duties, as well as the responsibilities, of the chairman.

Sec. 3. The secretary shall prepare all tribal correspondence and shall not sign notices or 
documents unless authorized by the business council. It shall be the duty of the secretary to 
keep a complete and accurate record of all matters transacted at council meetings and to submit 
copies of minutes of all meetings of the business council and general council to the Western 
Washington Agency.

Sec. 4. The treasurer shall have custody of and be responsible for all funds in the custody 
of the business council. The treasurer shall deposit all such funds in such federally insured banks 
or elsewhere as directed by the business council and shall keep proper records of such funds. 
The treasurer shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds 
on hand at the annual general council meeting and upon request of the business council. The 
treasurer shall not pay out any funds except when authorized to do so by the business council and 
all checks must be signed by the treasurer. The business council shall decide when the amount 
of funds being handled by the treasurer has become large enough to justify the need for an 
annual audit. It shall then require that the books and records of the treasurer shall be audited by 
either a competent auditor or by a Federal employee appointed by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs or his authorized representative. The treasurer will be required to have a surety bond 
satisfactory to the business council and the Superintendent of the Western Washington Agency. 
The surety bond will be obtained at the expense of the tribe.

Sec. 5 Appointive Officers. The duties of all appointive committees and officers 
appointed by the business council shall be clearly defined by resolution of the business council at 
the time of their creation or appointment. Such committees or officers shall report from time to 
time, as required, to the business council and their activities and decisions shall be subject to 
review by the business council upon petition of any person aggrieved.
 
 

ARTICLE II - INSTALLATION OF OFFICERS AND COUNCIL MEMBERS

 
 Newly elected members who have been duly certified shall be installed thereafter at the next 
regular meeting of the business council. Each member of the business council and each officer 
or subordinate officer, elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an oath of office prior to 
assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall pledge himself to support and defend the 
Constitution of the United States and this constitution and bylaws.

, do solemnly swear that I will support and defend 
Oath: “I, _____________________
the Constitution of the United States and the constitution of the Lummi Tribe; that I will carry 
out, faithfully and impartially, the duties of my office to the best of my ability; that I will 
cooperate, promote, and protect the best interests of my tribe, in accordance with its constitution 
and bylaws.”
 
 

ARTICLE III - TIME AND PLACE OF MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

 
 Section 1. Regular meetings of the business council shall be held on the first Friday of each 
month. The date of regular meetings may be changed by resolution of the business council. 
Meetings shall be held at the business office or such other places as the business council may 

designate from time to time. Special meetings may be called by written notice to all councilmen, 
signed by the chairman, or by a majority of the business council, and when so called by written 
notice to all councilmen, the business council shall have power to transact business as in a 
regular meeting.

Sec. 2. The annual election and general council meeting shall be held during the first 
week in January of each year, or at such other time as the business council determines.

Sec. 3. Quorum. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is present. A 
quorum of the business council shall consist of six (6) members of that council. A quorum of the 
general council shall consist of twenty-five (25) eligible voters; provided, however, that the lack 
of a quorum shall not be cause for postponing the annual election of tribal officials.

Sec. 4. The order of business for all meetings is that established in Robert’s Rules of 
Order, Revised Edition.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the adult voters of the Lummi 
Tribe, voting at a special election authorized by the Lummi Indian Business Council in which at 
least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Lummi 
Indian Business Council for its approval. It shall be in force from the date of such approval. 
[Amended: Resolution #98-23, March 6, 1998.]
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, James F. Canan, Commissioner of Indian Affairs do hereby approve the foregoing 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Lummi Tribe of the Lummi Reservation, Washington, as 
provided for in Article IV of the bylaws -RATIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND 
BYLAWS of said document.

Washington, D.C.

DATE: 

April 10, 1970

S/ James F. Canan_______________
Acting - Commissioner of Indian Affairs

CERTIFICATION OF APPROVAL OF AMENDMENT “A” (Article IX)

I, Hilda A. Manuel Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority 
delegated to me by Article IX of the Constitution and Bylaws of the Lummi Tribe of the Lummi 
Reservation, Washington hereby approve Amendment A. This Amendment is effective as of this 

date, PROVIDED, that nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action 
under this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

S/ Hilda A. Manuel______________
Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.

DATE:______June 20,1996

CERTIFICATION OF AMENDMENT - RESOLUTION #2006-019, FEBRUARY 7, 2006 
 
 
(ARTICLE I)

 
 I, Lloyd "Nick" Kinley, Chair of the Lummi Law and Justice Commission, have reviewed
this document as required bylaw, and I certify that this is a true and correct copy of the Lummi 
Constitution and Bylaws as Amended pursuant to Resolution #2006-019, that Article I was 
amended by the Lummi Indian Business Council, and that it is the duly enacted and certified law 
of the Lummi Nation.

Dated this 1 day of February, 2016

