 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE

LUMMI TRIBE OF THE

LUMMI RESERVATION
WASHINGTON


 
  
  
 APPROVED APRIL 2, 1948 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1957 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

LUMMI TRIBE OF THE LUMMI RESERVATION, 
WASHINGTON


Preamble

We, the members of the Lummi Tribe of Indians of the Lummi Res
ervation in the State of Washington, in order to form a tribal organiza
tion and promote our common welfare, do hereby establish this Con
stitution and By-laws.

Article I—Purpose

Our purpose shall be to promote and protect the interests of the 
Lummi Indians and to preserve peaceful and cooperative relations 
among the members of the Lummi Tribe, to cooperate with the Office 
of Indian Affairs, officers and appointees.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. Membership of the Lummi Tribe shall consist of:
(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear upon the 
January 1, 1947 official census roll of the Lummi Tribe on file at the 
Tulalip Indian Agency, Tulalip, Washington, and any children born 
to any member of the Lummi Tribe who is a resident of the reservation 
at the time of the birth of said child;

(b)  All other persons of Indian blood now resident upon the Lummi 
Reservation who are accepted by the General Council as members of 
the Lummi Tribe.

Sec. 2. Within a period of five years from the time that the 
constitution and by-laws takes effect corrections may be made in the 
membership roll by the Lummi Business Council with the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 3. The Lummi Business Council shall have the power to enact 
resolutions or ordinances subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior governing adoption and abandonment of membership.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Lummi Tribe shall be a 
Business Council of eleven members elected by popular vote of the 
adult members of the tribe.

Sec. 2. The term of office of each councilman shall be three years 

unless otherwise provided herein.

Sec. 3. The Business Council so organized shall elect from within 
its own number (1) a Chairman, (2) a Vice-Chairman, (3) a Secretary, 
and (4) a Treasurer, and may appoint or employ such other officers 
or committees as may be deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. All enrolled or otherwise recognized members of the Lummi 
Reservation twenty-one (21) years of age or over who have maintained 
legal residence in Whatcom County, Washington, for a period of sixty 
days immediately prior to any election are qualified voters at such elec
tion and shall be qualified to hold office after one year’s residence upon 
the Lummi Reservation. Such residence, however, shall not be re
quired as qualification for voting upon amendments to the Constitution 
and By-laws.

Sec. 5. After the ratification and approval of this Constitution and 
By-laws, the first Business Council under this Constitution shall be 
the present Council, who shall cast lots in order that the terms of office 
of the present members can be determined for one, two or three years, 
after which three councilmen shall be elected the first week in January 
of each year.

Article IV—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a councilman or other official shall die, resign, be re
moved or recalled from office, permanently leave the Reservation or be 
found guilty of a felony or a misdemeanor involving dishonesty in any 
Indian, State or Federal court, the Business Council shall declare the 
position vacant and shall call a special election to fill the unexpired 
term.

Sec. 2. The Business Council, may, by a majority vote, expel any 
councilman or officer for neglect of duty and gross misconduct. Before 
any vote for expulsion is taken in the matter, such member or official 
shall be given a written statement of the charges against him at least 
ten days before the meeting of the Business Council, before which he 
is to appear. He shall be given an opportunity to answer any and 
all charges at the designated Council meeting. The decision of the 
Business Council shall be final.

Sec. 3. Any councilman who shall absent himself from three suc
cessive meetings without being excused for cause, shall forfeit all rights 
to his office.

Article V—Powers and Duties of the Business Council

Section 1. The Business Council shall have the following powers, 
subject to any limitation imposed by Federal Statutes or by the Con
stitution of the United States:

(a)  To administer all tribal property by ordinance subject to the 

approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs;

(b)  To borrow money, subject to the approval of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs, from the Indian credit fund or from any other gov
ernmental agency, and to pledge or assign future tribal income as 
security for such loans;

(c)  To collect and expend any Lummi tribal funds within the ex
clusive control of the Tribe, and to recommend the expenditure of 
any other tribal funds;

(d)  To purchase in the name of the Lummi Indian Tribe any land 
or other property the Council may deem beneficial to said Lummi 
Indian Tribe;

(e)  To enforce approved regulations for the protection of tribal 

property, wild life and natural resources of the Lummi Tribe;

(f)  (1) To provide assessments or license fees upon non-members 
doing business or obtaining special privileges within the reservation, 
subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs;

(2)  To promulgate and enforce assessments or license fees upon 
members exercising special privileges or profiting upon general re
sources of the reservation;

(g)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments on 

behalf of the tribe;

(h)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the tribe and of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs;

(i)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets;

(j)  To exclude from the restricted land of the Lummi Reservation 
persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under ordinances which 
shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs;
(k)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, governing the 
conduct of members of the Lummi Tribe, and providing for the main
tenance of law and order and the administration of justice by estab
lishing a reservation court and defining its duties and powers;

(l)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and gen
eral welfare of the Lummi Reservation by regulating the conduct of 
trade and the use and disposition of property upon the reservation, 
provided that any ordinance directly affecting non-members of the 

Lummi Tribe shall be subject to the approval of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs;

(m)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Business 
Council itself and subordinate tribal organizations and tribal officials 
over whom it has jurisdiction;

(n)  To delegate to subordinate boards or to cooperative associa
tions which are open to all members of the tribe any of the foregoing 
powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of 
such delegated powers.

Sec. 2. Future Powers. The Lummi Business Council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Council.
Sec. 3. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the tribe but not expressly referred to in this constitution 
shall not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the 
people of the Lummi Reservation through the adoption of appropriate 
by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of review by the general council. The Chairman 
of the Lummi Business Council shall call a general council annually 
on election day, at which time he shall report in detail to the coun
cil what has been done during the past year and set forth the plans 
of the Council for the coming year. This shall be freely discussed 
by the general council and the wishes of the general council may 
be expressed by resolution or ordinance which shall govern the future 
action of the Lummi Business Council, or repeal or amend any past 
action of the Council, as of the date of such repeal or amendment.

The chairman shall call special meetings of the general council 

upon the written request of twenty (20) voters.

Article VI—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Lummi Tribe voting at an election called 
for that purpose. It shall be the duty of the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs to call an election upon the request of two-thirds (%) vote 
of the Business Council or upon receipt of a petition signed by thirty 
eligible voters of the tribe.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE LUMMI TRIBE
 
 Article I—The Business Council

Section 1. The, Chairman of the Business Council. The Chair
man of the Business Council shall preside over all meetings of the 
Tribe, he shall perform all duties of the Chairman and exercise any 
authority delegated to him by the Business Council, and he shall vote 
only in the case of a tie.

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman of the Business Council. The Vice-Chair
man of the Business Council shall assist the Chairman when called 
upon to do so. In the absence of the Chairman, he shall preside, and 
when so presiding, shall have all the rights, privileges and duties, as 
well as the responsibilities of the Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary of the Business Council. The Secretary of the 
Business Council shall conduct all correspondence and keep a com
plete and accurate record of all matters transacted at council meet
ings. It shall be his duty to submit promptly to the Superintendent 
of the jurisdiction copies of all minutes of regular and special meet
ings of the Business Council.

Sec. 4. Treasurer of the Business Council. The Treasurer of the 
Business Council shall be the custodian of all moneys which may come 
into the control of the Council. He shall pay out money when duly 
authorized and instructed by the Business Council. He shall keep an 
account of all receipts and disbursements, and shall report same to 
the Business Council at each regular meeting.

The books of the Treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection 

at the direction of the Business Council.

The Business Council may make such provisions for the custody 
and disbursement of funds as shall guarantee their safe and proper 
disbursement and use.

Sec. 5. Appointive Officers. The duties of all appointive com
mittees and officers appointed by the Business Council shall be clearly 
defined by resolution of the Business Council at the time of their 
creation or appointment. Such committees or officers, shall report 
from time to time, as required, to the Business Council, and their 
activities and decisions shall be subject to review by the Business 
Council upon the petition of any person aggrieved.

Article II—Time and Place of Meetings and Procedure

Section 1. Regular meetings of the Business Council shall be held 
on the first Friday of each month in the Library of the Lummi Reser
vation School. Special meetings may be called by written notice 
signed by the Chairman or by a petition signed by a majority of 
council members, or by a petition signed by ten percent (10%) or 
more of legal voters, and when so called, the Business Council shall 
have power to transact business as in a regular meeting.

Sec. 2. Quorum. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum 
is present. A quorum shall consist of six (6) members of the Council, 
or a majority of the Council membership.

Sec. 3. Order of Business. The following order of business is es

tablished for all meetings: (Robert’s Rules of Order).

1.  Call to order by Chairman
2.  Roll call
3.  Ascertainment of a quorum
4.  Reading of the Minutes of the last meeting
5.  Adoption of minutes by a vote or common consent
6.  Unfinished business
7.  New business
8.  Informal discussion of local business
9.  Adjournment.

Article III—Ratification of Constitution and By-laws

This Constitution and By-laws shall be in full force and effect when
ever a majority of the adult voters of the Lummi Tribe voting in an 
election called for that purpose by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters, shall have 
ratified such Constitution and By-laws, and the Commissioner of In
dian Affairs shall have approved same.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION
 
 Pursuant to an order approved on November 13, 1947, by the Act
ing Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the attached Constitution and 
Bylaws was submitted for ratification to the members of the Lummi 
Tribe of the Lummi Reservation, Washington, and was on January 2, 
1948, duly approved by a vote of 134 for, and 3 against, in an election 
in which over thirty percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots 
in accordance with Article III of the Bylaws.

George James
Chairman, Election Board.
Florence H. Kinley
Secretary, Election Board

Helena Jeffersen
Election Board Member 

F. A. Gross
Superintendent, Tulalip Agency
 
 

APPROVAL
 
 This Constitution and By-laws, having been proposed and duly 
ratified by members of the Lummi Tribe of the Lummi Reservation in 
the State of Washington, on January 2, 1948, at a referendum duly 
called by the Acting Commissioner on Indian Affairs is herewith 
approved.

John H. Provinse
Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C., April 2, 1948.

