 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 
MANCHESTER BAND OF POMO INDIANS 
OF THE MANCHESTER RANCHERIA

CALIFORNIA


 
  
  
 APPROVED MARCH 11, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE MANCHESTER
BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE MANCHESTER
RANCHERIA OF CALIFORNIA


We, the people of the Manchester Rancheria, in order to establish 
a legal rancheria organization and secure certain privileges and 
powers offered to us by the Indian Reorganization Act, do ordain and 
establish this Constitution and Bylaws for the Manchester Band 
of Porno Indians of the Manchester Rancheria.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Manchester Band of Pomo Indians shall 
extend to the territory within the confines of the Manchester Ran
cheria, and to such other lands as may hereafter be added thereto 
under any law of the United States, except as otherwise provided by 
law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Manchester Band of Pomo 

Indians shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the offi

cial census rolls of the band as of April 1,1935;

(b)  All children born to any member of the band who is a resi

dent of the Rancheria at the time of the birth of said children.

Sec. 2. The community council shall have the power to promul
gate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering future membership and the adoption of new members, when 
the resources of the band make such adoptions feasible.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Manchester Band of Pomo 
Indians shall be the community council which shall: be composed 
of all qualified voters of the band. A majority of the eligible voters 
shall constitute a quorum.

Sec. 2. All enrolled members of the Manchester Band of Pomo 
Indians who are 21 years of age or over, and who have maintained 
legal residence on the Rancheria for a period of 1 year immediately 
prior to any election, are qualified voters at such election. Such 
residence, however, shall not be required as a qualification for voting 
upon amendments to the constitution and attached bylaws.

Sec. 3. The Community Council shall elect from its own members, 
by secret ballot, (a) chairman; (b) vice chairman; (c) secretary; 
(d) treasurer; (e) and such other officers and committees as may 
be deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. The community council shall meet on the first Monday 

of January and July.

Sec. 5. Within 30 days after the ratification and approval of 
this constitution and bylaws, a community council shall be held 
for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it may 
transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers 
elected at this meeting shall serve until the July meeting at which 
time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be 
chosen at the July meeting.

Sec. 6. The chairman, or 25 percent of the qualified voters, may, 
by written notice, call special meetings of the community council.
Sec. 7. The business committee shall consist of the chairman, sec
retary, and treasurer of the community council, and shall perform 
such duties as may be authorized by that council.

Article IV—Powers of the Community Council

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The community council of the 
Manchester Band of Pomo Indians shall exercise the following 
powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the 
Constitution of the United States:

To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments;

(a) 
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;
(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets of the band;

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Manchester Rancheria prior to the submission of such estimates to 
the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Man
chester Band of Pomo Indians in accordance with the terms of a 
charter that may be issued to the band by the Secretary of the 
Interior;

(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct 
of members of the Manchester Band of Pomo Indians, providing 
for the manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of 
tribal land or interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes 
and the appropriation of available tribal funds for public purposes, 
providing for the licensing of nonmembers coming upon the Ran
cheria for purposes of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, 
and for the exclusion from the territory of the band, of persons not 
so licensed, and establishing proper agencies for the enforcement 
of such ordinances upon the Manchester Rancheria;
 (g) To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the band, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power;
(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this constitution 
and the attached bylaws, regulating the procedure of the council 
itself, and of other tribal agencies, tribal officials, or tribal organi
zations of the Manchester Rancheria.

Sec. 2. Future powers.—The community council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the coun
cil by members of the band or by the Secretary of the Interior or 
any other duly authorized official or agency of the State or Federal 
Government.

Sec. 3. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Manchester Band of Pomo Indians, but not expressly 
referred to in this constitution shall not be abridged by this article, 
but may be exercised by the people of the Manchester Band of Pomo 
Indians through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and constitu
tional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the superintendent in charge of 
the rancheria, who shall, within 10 days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secre
tary of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of 
enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, 
by notifying the community council of such decision.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him, within 10 days after its enactment, 
he shall advise the community council of his reasons therefor. 
If these reasons appear to the council insufficient, it may, by a 
majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary 
of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of its enact
ment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance 
or resolution shall become effective.

Article V—Amendments

Section 1. This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the band voting at an elec
tion called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, pro
vided that at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in 
such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it 
shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. At any regular or special community council meeting, 
amendments to this constitution and bylaws may be proposed, to be 
acted upon at the next semiannual community council meeting. If 
approved by a majority vote at such meeting, the proposed amend
ment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior who shall 
thereupon call an election upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE MANCHESTER BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE 
MANCHESTER RANCHERIA, CALIFORNIA

 
 Article 1. Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take 
an oath of office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which 
oath he shall pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution 
of the United States and this constitution and bylaws.

Oath: “I,__________ _______ , do solemnly swear that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against 
all enemies; that I will carry out, faithfully and impartially, the 
duties of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, 
promote, and protect the best interests of my band in accordance 
with this constitution and bylaws.”

Art. 2. It shall be the duty of the community council and each 
member thereof to promote the general welfare of the members of 
this band and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this con
stitution and bylaws.

Art. 3. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside over all 
meetings of the community council and carry out all orders of the 
council. All members of the council and all subordinate officers shall 
assist the chairman in all proper ways to carry out the orders of the 
council.

Art. 4. The community council secretary shall keep a full report 
of all proceedings of each regular and special meeting of the com
munity council and of the business committee, and shall perform 
such other duties of like nature as the community council shall from 
time to time by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of the 
minutes of each meeting to the superintendent in charge of the 
Rancheria, and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Art. 5. The community council treasurer shall be the custodian 
of all moneys which may come under the jurisdiction or into the 
control of the community council. He shall pay out money in 
accordance with the orders and resolutions of the community council. 
He shall keep account of all receipts and disbursements and shall 
report the same to the community council at each regular meeting. 
He shall be bonded in such an amount as the community council 
may by resolution, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Af
fairs, provide. The books of the council treasurer shall be subject 
to audit or inspection at the direction of the community council, or 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Until the treasurer is bonded, 
the business committee may make such provision for the custody and 
disbursement of funds as shall guarantee their safety and proper 
disbursement and use.

Art. 6. The subordinate officers of the community council shall 
perform such duties as the community council may from time to time 
provide by resolution.

Art. 7. The order of business at any regular or special meeting of 

the community council shall be as follows:

1.  Council called to order.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the council treasurer.
6.  Reading of communications.
7.  Unfinished business.
8.  New business.
9.  Adjournment.
Art. 8. Ratification of constitution and bylaws.—This constitution 
and bylaws, when adopted by a majority vote of the voters of the 
Manchester Band of Pomo Indians, voting at a special election called

by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 30 percent of those 
entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the 
Interior for his approval, and shall be in force from the date of 
such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved January 15, 1936, by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached constitution and bylaws was submitted 
for ratification to the adult Indians residing on the Manchester 
Rancheria and was on February 8, 1936, duly approved by a vote of 
33 for, and 4 against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those 
entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of 
the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (Pub. No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Sidney Parrish, 

Chairman of Election Board.
Steve Parrish, 
Secretary of Election Board.

Roy Nash, 

Superintendent in Charge of the Rancheria.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and bylaws of the Manchester Band of 
Pomo Indians of the Manchester Rancheria.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution 
or bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Manchester Band 
of Pomo Indians of the Manchester Rancheria.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and bylaws.

Approval recommended.

William Zimmerman, Jr.,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Charles West, 

Acting Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

Washington, D. C., March 11, 1936.
 
  
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
 
 of the 
 
MANCHESTER BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE 

MANCHESTER RANCHERIA


 
  
 That an article be added to the Constitution, as follows: 
 

ARTICLE VI

 
 Section 1. Any officer who may resign, die, or be 
removed from office, shall be replaced only at a 
regular elootion or at a special election of the 
Community Council,

Section 2. Any officer convicted of a felony or 
misdemeanor involving dishonesty in any Federal, 
State or Indian Court may be removed from office 
by a majority vote of the Community Council,

Section 3. The Community Council may, by a majority 
vote, expel any officer of the Council for neglect 
of duty or gross misconduct; Provided, That the 
accused shall be given an opportunity to answer any 
and all charges at a designated Council meeting. 
The decision of the Council shall be final.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior 

of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 

me by the Act of June IS, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 

approve the attached Amendment adding a new Article VI to the 

Constitution and By-laws of the Manchester Band of Porno Indians of 

the Manchester Rancheria.

Approval recommended: MAY 22 l939

Assistant to the Commissioner

Washington, D. C.

MAY 2 7 1939

Assistant Secretary of the Interior


AMENDMENT-CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 
MANCHESTER BAND OF POMO INDIANS OF THE MAN 
CHESTER RANCHERIA


A M ENDM ENT.

1.  That the last line of Section 1, Article III of the Constitution and 

Bylaws he amended to read:

"Thirty percent of the eligible voters shall constitute a quorum."

2.  That Section 4, Article III of the Constitution and Bylaws be 

amended to read:

 “The general community council shall meet on the second Friday of 

November and April."

3.  That the second sentence in Section 5, Article III of the Consti

tion and Bylaws be deleted in its entirety.

4.  That the last line of Section 5. Article III of the Constitution 

and Bylaws be amended to read:

"Thereafter, officials shall be chosen at the November meeting.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved April 13, 1940, by the Assistant Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached Amendment to the Constitution and 
By-laws of the Manchester Band of Porno Indians of the Manchester 
Rancheria was submitted for ratification to the qualified voters of the 
Community, and on May 18, 1940, the Amendment was adopted by a 
vote of 13 for and 3 against, in an election in which more than 30 per 
cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with section 
16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18. 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as 
amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Slat. 378).

Chairman, Manchester Community Council.

Steve Parrish, 

Frances Latwa.

Secretary, Manchester Community Council.

Roy Nasu.

Superintendent, Sacramento Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 18,1934 (4s Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Amendment to the Constitution and By-laws of the Man
chester Band of Pomo Indians of the Manchester Rancheria.

Approval recommended: July 10, 1940.
F. H. Daiker,

Assistant to the Commissioner.

Washington, D. C., July 12, 1940.

Oscar L. Chapman.

Assistant Secretary.

[seal]


AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
MANCHESTER BAND OF POMO INDIANS 
OF THE MANCHESTER RANCHERIA 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT III


Section 1, Article II - Membership - shall be amended in its entirety 
to read as follows:

Section 1, The membership of the Manchester Band of Pomo
Indians shall consist of:

(a)  Those living persons of Indian blood whose names appear 
on the "Approved List of Voters for the Constitution at the 
Manchester Rancheria" approved January 25, 1936 by Roy Nash, 
Superintendent, Sacramento Indian Agency.

(b)  Those living person's of Indian blood whose names appear 
on the "Approved List of Children on the Manchester Rancheria 
(under 21), 1935-1936" approved by the Community Council, 
November 14, 1936.

(c)  All living descendants of people eligible for membership 
under Section 1(a) or 1(b) above, regardless of whether the 
ancestor through whom eligibility is claimed is living or 
deceased.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area Director, Sacramento

Area Office on May 23, 1975 the attached Amendment

III to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Manchester Band of Pomo 

Indians of the Manchester Rancheria of California was submitted to 

the qualified voters of the community and was on

1975, duly adopted by a vote of 60 for, and 4 against,

in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 151

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of

the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat, 984), as 

amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Approval

I, William E. Finole

, Area Director, of the 

Sacramento Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the 

authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, delegated to the Commis

sioner of Indian Affairs by 230 DM 1,1 and redelegated to me by 

10 BIAM 3 do hereby approve the foregoing Amendment III to the 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Manchester Band of Porno Indians of 

the Manchester Rancheria, California.

Area Director

Sacramento, California

Date: Sep 18 1975


AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
MANCHESTER-POINT ARENA BAND OF POMO INDIANS 
OF THE MANCHESTER-POINT ARENA RANCHERIA 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT IV


Article III, Section 5 - GOVERNING BODY - shall be amended to 
read as follows:

Section 5. Within thirty (30) days after the 
ratification and approval of this Constitution and
Bylaws, a Community Council meeting shall be held for the 
purpose of electing the officers named herein, and it may 
transact such other business as may be necessary.
Thereafter, officials shall be chosen every two (2) years 
at the November meeting.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area Director, Sacramento Area 

Office on July 20, 1981, the attached Amendment IV to the

Constitution and Bylaws of the Manchester Band of Pomo Indians of the

Manchester Rancheria of California, was submitted to the qualified voters 

of the tribe and was on September 12, 1981, duly adopted/rejeected by

a vote of 19 for, and 5 against, in an election in which at least

thirty percent (30%) of the 57 entitled to vote cast their ballots

in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 

1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

approval

I, Eddie V. Edwards, Acting Area Director, of the Sacramento 

Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority 

granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 

(48 Stat. 984), as amended, delegated to the Commissioner of Indian

Affairs by 230 IM 1.1 and redelegated to me by 10 BIAM 3 do hereby 

approve the foregoing Amendment IV to the Constitution and Bylaws of 

the Manchester Band of Pomo Indians of the Manchester-Point Arena

Rancheria, California.

(Sgd) Eddie V. Edwards

Acting Area Director
Acting Area Director

Sacramento, California

Date: Sep 18 1981


AMENDMENT 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE 
MANCHESTER-POINT ARENA BAND OF POMO INDIANS 
OF THE MANCHESTER-POINT ARENA RANCHERIA 
CALIFORNIA

AMENDMENT V


Article III, Section 2 - GOVERNING BODY - shall be amended in 
its entirety to read as follows:

Section 2. All enrolled members who are 18 years of age 
or over, who have maintained legal residence on the 
Rancheria for a period of six (6) months. Residency 
shall be defined as residing 6 months on the Rancheria, 
prior to any election. Members who have established 
their 6 months residency would retain their residency 
voting rights, should they leave the Rancheria for any of 
the following reasons.

1.  Military duty.

2.  Full or part time students who are furthering their 
education.

3.  Vacations or extended vacations.

4.  To seek employment.

5.  Medical reasons.

6. Correctional facility.

Such residence, however, shall not be required as a 
qualification for voting upon amendments to the 
Constitution and attached Bylaws.

certificate of results of election

Pursuant to an election authorized by the Area Director, Sacramento Area

Office on July 20, 1981, the attached Amendment V to the

Constitution and Bylaws of the Manchester Band of Pomo Indians of the

Manchester Rancheria of California, was submitted to the qualified voters

of Che tribe and was on September 12, 1981, duly adopted/rejected by

a vote of 19 for, and 5 against, in an election in which at

least thirty percent (30%) of the 57 entitled to vote cast their 

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 

of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935

(49 Stat. 378).

Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Eddie V. Edwards, Acting Area Director, of the Sacramento 

Area Office, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority 

granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 

(48 Stat. 984), as amended, delegated to the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs by 230 DM 1.1 and redelegated to me by 10 BIAM 3 do hereby 

approve the foregoing Amendment V to the Constitution and Bylaws of 

the Manchester Band of Porno Indians of the Manchester-Point Arena 

Rancheria, California.

(Sgd) Eddie V. Edwards

Acting Area Director

Sacramento, California

SEP 18 1981

