 
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
OF THE
MANZANITA BAND OF HISSION INDIANS
MANZANITA RESERVATION, CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We, the Indians of the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians of California, in 
order to establish a tribal organization under the provisions of Section 16 
of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended 
by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378) and to administer our tribal 
affairs, do hereby ordain and establish this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME AND TERRITORY

 
 The name of this organization shall be called The Manzanita Band of Mission 
Indians, hereinafter referred to as The Manzanita Band and shall have 
jurisdiction over the lands within the boundaries of the Manzanita Reservation 
and over any lands which may hereafter be acquired by or for the Band.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1 - Membership in the Band shall consist of those living Indians 
in the following categories:

A. Persons whose names appear on the January 1, 1940
Manzanita Census Roll except that where ”NE" appears on 
Column I opposite the name of an individual, such person 
shall be eligible for membership,

B. Lineal descendants of those persons in subsection (A) 
above, provided such descendants are not less than one-sixteenth 
(1/16) degree of California Indian blood.

Section 2 - Persons who meet the requirements of Section 1 (A) or (B) above 
who are enrolled or affiliated as a member of some other group or band 
of Indians shall not be eligible for membership.

Section 3 - The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance 
with rules and regulations prescribed in an Ordinance adopted by the 
Council and approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative. Such Ordinance shall contain, among other things, provisions 
for an initial roll, Enrollment Committee, a requirement to complete an 
application form in order to be considered for enrollment, provisions for 
approval and disapproval of applications, rejection notices, appeals and 
provisions for keeping the roll current.

Section 4 - Admission to membership through adoption shall be governed by 
an Ordinance enacted by the Council, such Ordinance to become effective

 upon approval by the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized 

representative.
 
 

 
ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1 - The Manzanita Band shall be governed by the Council which shall 
consist of all 18 years of age or older. Each member of the Council shall 
be a qualified voter.

Section 2 - In addition to the Council there shall be elected a Manzanita 
Tribal Committee consisting of a Chairman and two (2) Committee Members, 
whose terms of office shall be for two (2) years. Members of the Committee 
shall hold office until their successors are duly elected and installed. 
The Manzanita Tribal Committee, hereinafter referred to as the Committee 
Members, shall select a Secretary-Treasurer to assist them in the adminis
tration of tribal affairs. The Secretary-Treasurer may or may not be a member 
of The Manzanita Band, but shall not, be entitled to vote as an officer. 
Any member of the Manzanita Band when duly nominated and elected shall have 
the right to hold office.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1 - Nominations for Chairman and Committee Members shall be from the 
floor at a Council meeting held specifically for that purpose at least 
thirty (30) days before the election. However, nominations can also be re
commended by a nominating Committee appointed by the Chairman, which shall 
be presented at the meeting called for nominations.

 Section 2 - All elections will be held on the first Saturday in December 

and shall be conducted by the Committee. Voting shall be by secret ballot 
with the names of each candidate and the office he or she seeks shown there
on. When requested, absentee ballots shall be furnished for members who are 
unable to attend the election, in ample time for them to be returned and 
included in the tally. The candidates receiving the highest number of votes 
for their respective offices shall be elected. In such elections, at least 
(20%) of the qualifed voters must vote.

Section 3 - Following approval of this organizational document, the incumbent 
Chairman and Committee Members shall serve as the Committee under this 
Constitution and Bylaws until the first regular election in December of the 
year in which approval is given. Thereafter, elections shall be conducted 
in accordance with resolutions or ordinances adopted by the Council, which 
shall provide for the dates thereof, polling places, election committees 
and their duties, absentee balloting, and any other requirements.
 
 

ARTICLE V - VACANCIES AND REMOVALS FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 1 - If a member of the Committee shall die, resign, be removed 
'from office, or be convicted of a felony while in office, the Committee shall 
declare the position vacant and therefore appoint another member of the 
Manzanita Band to serve the unexpired term.

Section 2 - If a member of the Committee fails on refuses to attend three 
meetings in succession, unless illness or due to other causes for which he 
or she cannot be held responsible and for which he or she is excused by the 
Chairman, his or her office shall be considered forfeited immediately and 
the Committee shall appoint another member of the Manzanita Band in his or 
her place to serve the unexpired term.
 
 

 
 
 Section 3 - The members of the Manzanita Band shall have the power to remove 
by just cause any member of the Committee by filing a petition with the 
Chairman of the Committee signed by at least (20%) of the eligible voters 
stating the charges and asking for removal of said member.

The accused will be given an opportunity to appear before the Council to 
answer the charges against him or her. Within thirty (30) days after such 
hearing, the Committee shall hold a recall election whereupon a secret 
ballot vote of guilty or not guilty will be conducted. The decision of a 
majority of those voting in such recall election shall govern, providing 
that at least (20%) of those eligible to vote shall vote in the election. 
Thereafter the Committee shall appoint a Manzanita member to fill the 
unexpired term.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE COUNCIL AND BUSINESS COMMITTEE

 
 Section 1 - The Council shall have the powers and the responsibilities 
hereinafter provided, subject to any limitation imposed upon such powers 
by the Statues of the United States or the State of California.

A.  To consult, negotiate, contract or conclude agreements with 

federal, state and local governments on activities which may 
affect the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians,

B.  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior or his authorized representative.

C.  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of 

tribal lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets un
less the consent of members of the Manzanita Band of Mission 
Indians is obtained.

D.  The Secretary of the Interior shall advise the Council or its 

Committee of all appropriation estimates or federal projects 
for the benefit of the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians 
prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 
Budget and the Congress.

E.  To administer assets and to manage all economic affairs and 
enterprises on unassigned lands of the Manzanita Band of 
Mission Indians.

G.  To assess fees for payment of the expenses or to finance any 

project which is for the benefit of the members of the 
Manzanita Band as a whole.

H. 

To establish rules of procedure for the conduct of its affairs.

Section 2 - The following powers shall be set forth in Ordinances unassigned
by the Council and approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his 
authorized representative.

A.  To make assignements of reservation lands and to lease 

unassigned or acquired lands.

B. To prescribe rules and regulations governing future membership 

and laws of membership.

Section 3 - The Committee shall have the following administrative powers 
and duties, but shall not commit the Manzanita Band to any . contract, lease, 
or other arrangements unless it is so empowered by a duly enacted ordinance 
or resolution of the Council:

A.  To promulgate all ordinances, resolutions or other enactments 

of the Manzanita Band.

B.  Represent the members in all negotiations between the Band and 

local, state and federal governments, their agencies and 
officers.

C.  Faithfully advise the members of all aforementioned negotiations.

Section 4 - Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the members of the 
Band but not expressly referred to in this article shall not be lost by 
reason of their omission but may be exercised with the adoption of approp
riate bylaws or amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1 - Regular and Special Council Meetings shall be called by the 
Chairman as the need arises. Special meetings shall also be called by the 
Chairman upon receipt of a petition signed by at least (20%) of the 
eligible voters of the Band. In meetings of the Council, the eligible 
voters present shall constitute a quorum. Notice of all Council meetings 
shall be given in writing of all eligible voters at least ten (10) days in 
advance or the meetings.

Section 2 - Meetings of the Committee shall be called by the Chairman as 
the need arises. Two (2) members of the Committee shall constitute a quorum 

 and no business shall be conducted in the absence of a quorum.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - BILL OR RIGHTS

 
 The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 
1968 (82 Stat. 77) against actions of a tribe in exercising its power of 
self-government, shall apply to the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution and Bylaws may be proposed by a majority of 
the voting members present, but elections on such amendments must be 
conducted in accordance with the Secretary of the Interior’s regulations 
pertaining to elections for groups organized under Section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act, approved June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as amended.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE MANZANITA BAND OF MISSION INDIANS

ARTICLE I  - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Newly elected officers shall assume their respective positions and duties 
immediately upon being elected.

Section 1 - The Chairman shall preside at all meetings of the Council and 
of the Manzanita Tribal Committee and shall execute on behalf of the 
reservation all contracts, leases or other documents approved by the Council 
and shall certify all ordinances and resolutions adopted by the Council. 
The Chairman shall have general supervision of all other officers, employees 
and Committee of the reservation and see that their duties are properly 
performed. When neither the Council nor the Tribal Committee is in session, 
he shall be the officials representative of the reservation.

Section 2 - The Committee Members shall assist the Chairman whenever called 
on to do so, and in the absence of the Chairman, one of the Committee Members 
shall assume the duties of the Chairman.

Section 3 - The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep the minutes of all meetings 
and shall attest to the enactment of all resolutions and ordinances. Copies 
of all minutes, resolutions and ordinances shall be submitted to the Bureau 
of Indian Affairs as soon after enactment as possible. He shall carry out 
the financial directives of the Council, receive all local monies of the 
reservations, and keep an accurate account of the receipts and disbursements. 
Funds shall be deposited in the reservation account in a local bank selected 
by the Council where depositor's funds are insured by Federal Deposit 
Insurance Corporation. All disbursements shall be made by check cosigned by 
the Chairman in accordance with resolutions of the Council. He shall file a 
bond satisfactory to the Council and the Area Director, when either are of 
the opinion sufficient funds have accumulated in the reservation treasury. 
The Secretary-Treasurer shall give a financial report to the Council and 
representatives of the Bureau of Indian Affairs.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - ADOPTION

 
 The Constitution and Bylaws when by a majority vote of the eligible voters 
voting, provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote 
in such an election shall vote in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended, shall be
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval and shall become 
effective from the date of his approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION 

 
 We, the undersigned, duly elected members of the Manzanita Band of Mission 

Indians, do hereby certify that the foregoing Constitution and Bylaws was 

duly adopted by the members of the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians by a 

vote of ____ "for" and ____  "against" and ____ "abstaining" at a duly called

General Meeting on 19 .

Spokesman 

Secretary

Treasurer 

Committee Member

Committee Member

RECOMMENDED FOR APPROVAL: 

APPROVED:

Area Director 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Date 

Date
 
 

 
CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION 

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 

on March 13, 1975 under delegated authority, the attached Constitution of 

the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians, Manzanita Indian Reservation, California 

was submitted to the qualified voters of the Band and was on July 12, 1975, 

duly adopted by a vote of 12 for and 0 against, in an election in 

which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 39 persons entitled to 

vote cast their ballots in accordance with the Indian Reorganization Act of 

June IB, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 

378).
 
 

APPROVAL 

 
 I, morris Thompson Commissioner of Indian

Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the 

Interior by the Act of June 18, 1034 (48 Stat. 984) as aemended, and 

delegated to me by 230 D. M, 1.1, do hereby approve the Constitution 

of the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians of the Manzanita Reservation 

in California.
 
 

MORRIS THOMPSON

 
 Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C. 
Date: JAN 9 1976

Tribal Government Services

JAN 9 1976

Through: Sacramento Area Director, Sacramento, California 95825

Mr. Jerome Tomhave

Superintendent, Southern California Agency

Dear Mr. Tomhave:

We have received the results of an election held on July 12, 1975, 
by the qualified voters of the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians 
under authority delegated by John O. Crow, Deputy Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs, on November 30, 1972, to the Sacramento Area 
Director and renewed by Commissioner Norri Thompson on 
March 13, 1975. It appears that the July 12, 1975, election was 
held more than ninety days after the renewal of such delegated 
authority. That authority is extended as of June 13, 1975, nunc pro 
tunc, for a period of ninety days.

As evidenced by the Certificate of results of Election signed by the 
mentors of the election board, the proposed constitution was duly 
adopted by the voters at the July 13, 1975, election.

The authority to conduct the election on the constitution was originally 
delegated to the Sacramento Area Director without the benefit of review 
by constitutional specialists on the central office staff because of the 
extraordinary circumstances existing in the central office in 
November 1972. That authority was renewed in March 1975 again without 
substantive review of the document. As a result, it appears that there 
are some ambiguities which we now recommend be removed as soon 
as possible by amending the constitution. In Article VI, Section 2, 
the meaning of "unassigned" should be certified. Under Article VII, 
Section 1, "a quorum of the council is established simply by the eligible 
voters present. This language would permit two voters to establish 
a quorum and run all the affairs of the tribe. Although the constitution 
established a three member tribal Committee, it also provided that 
the entire Tribal Council would exercise most of the power. A quorum 
provision which would permit two persons to establish a quorum 
inconsistent with the apparent desire to retain most of the governing 
power in the Triba1 Council. This should be clarified.

 In addition to these substantive difficulties, there are some minor

inconsistencies which should be cleared up. For example, Article 
III - Governing body, Section 2, describes a "Tribal Committee” 
but Article VI is headed "Powers of the Council and Business 
Committee”. If the band would like some assistance in proposing 
amendments to clarify its constitution, central office staff is 
available to work with you and the Area Director to help the band.

Since I am confident that the band will be able to work out these and 
any other remaining ambiguities, I hereby approve the Constitution 
of the Manzanita Band of Mission Indians, Manzanita Reservation, 
California and return it for delivery to the band.

Sincerely yours,
 
 

MORRIS THOMPSON

 
 Commissioner of Indian Affairs

