 
  
 Constitution 
 

OF THE

 
 Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe

By-Laws of the

Mashpee Wampanoag Tribal Council, Inc.

Certification of Constitution and By-Laws
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
 I. Constitution of the

Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe

Preamble 

Article: I
Name 
Definitions 

Article II
Jurisdiction 

Article III
Tribal Member 
Section 1.  Requirements 
Section 2.  Ineligibility For Tribal

2

2
2

2

2
2

Membership 

2
Section 3.  Enrollment Committee 2 
Section 4. Appeal From Denial of Tribal

Membership Application 3

Section 5.  Automatic Forfeiture of

Tribal Membership 3
Section 6.  Removal From Tribal Membership 

Roll by Tribal Council 3

Section 7.  Relinquishment of Enrollment 
Enforcement 
Section 8. 

3
3

Article IV
3
Elections 
Section 1.  Voter Requirements 
3
Section 2.  Voting 
3
Section 3.  Regular and Special Elections 3
Section 4.  Election Committee 
3
Section 5.  Election Ordinance 
4
Section 6.  First Election 
4

Article: V
4
Tribal Government Powers 
Section I.  Separation of Power 
4
Section 2.  Tribal Council s Powers 
5
Section 3.  Tribal Judiciary s Powers 
5
Section 4.  Ethics in Tribal Government 5

Article VI
Tribal Council 
Section I. Composition,Qualifications, 
Terms of Office. Officers and 
Committees 
Section 2. Enumerated Powers of 

5

the Tribal Council  5

Article VII
Duties of Officers 
Section I.  Duties of the Chairperson 
Section 2.  Duties of the Vice-Chairperson 
Section 3.  Duties of the Secretary 
Section 4.  Duties of the Treasurer 
Section 5.  Duties of Committees or

Appointive Officers 

5

6
6
6
6
6

6

Article VIII 
Vacancies and Removal of Tribal Officials  6
Section 1. Recall 
6
Section 2. Expulsion and Suspension 

of Tribal Council Members 7

Section 3.  Automatic Vacancies 
Section 4. The Filling of Vacancies 
8

In Office 

Section 5. Tribal Judiciary Excluded 
Section 6. Succession to Chairperson 

and Vice-Chairperson  8

8

8

Article IX 
Procedures of the Tribal Council 
8
Section 1.  Meetings of the Tribal Council 8
Section 2. Ordinances, Resolutions, 
9
and Motions 

Section 3.  Posting Procedure 
Section 4.  General Tribal Membership

Meeting 

9

10

Articie X
10
Tribal Judiciary 
Section 1.  Structure 
10
Section 2.  Appointment and Term of Office IO
10
Section 3.  Compensation 
Section 4. Qualifications and Disqualifications 10
Section 5. Removal from Office by Tribal

Section 6. Rules of Tribal Courts 
Section 7.  Records and Court Clerk 
Section 8.  Appropriations 
Section 9.  Enforcement 

Council and Automatic Vacancies 10
 
  
  
 
II
 
 11
11 
 
II

 
 Article XI
Civil and Aboriginal Rights 
11
Section 1.  Civil Rights 
11
Section 2.  Aboriginal Rights 
11
Section 3.  Rights Retained by the People 11

Article XII
Initiative and Referendum 
Section I.  General Authority 
Section 2.  Results of Election 

Article: XIII
Amendments 

Article: XIV
Certificate of Results of Election 
and Savings 

12
12
12

12

12

II. By-Laws of the Mashpee Wampanoag 

Tribal Council, Inc. 

13-14

III. Certification of Constitution 

and Bylaws Votes 

15

I. Constitution of the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe

Preamble:

Article II

This Constitution is created under the divine 
guidance of our Creator and the wisdom of 
our ancestors to establish and proclaim to the 
World that we, the People of the First Light, are 
a sovereign nation.

This Constitution is established for the self 
governance of the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribe, 
as is our inherent right to do.

This Tribe declares this Constitution to be the 
free act and will of its people. The Constitution 
is created without fear of, nor wanting from any 
man, woman, child, or government, The Tribe 
extends peace and respect for our neighbors, 
with whom we share Mother Earth.

Accordingly, we, the Tribal members being a 
sovereign native people, in order to organize 
for the common good, to protect our self
government and our right to govern ourselves 
under our own laws and customs, to maintain 
and foster our tribal culture, to protect our 
homeland, to conserve and develop its natural 
resources, to promote the social, economic, and 
spiritual well-being of our people, do establish 
and adopt this Constitution to govern, protect, 
and advance the common good of the Tribe and 
for its future generations.
 
 

ARTICLE I

 
 Name
The name of this Tribe shall be the Mashpee 
Wampanoag Tribe.

Definitions
"Malfeasance" shall mean a wrongful act which 
the actor has no legal right to do, or any wrongful 
conduct which affects, interrupts, or interferes 
with performance of official duty, or an act for 
which there is no authority or warrant of law 
or which a person ought not to do at all. or the 
unjust performance of some act. which party 
performing it has no right, or has contracted not, 
to do.

“Nonfeasance” shall mean nonperformance of 
some act which ought to be performed, omission 
to perform a required duty at all, or total neglect 
of duty.

“Tribe" shall mean the Mashpee Wampanoag 
Tribe.

“Tribal Council” shall mean the governing body 
of the Tribe.

“Tribal Member" shall mean an enrolled 
member of the Tribe.

“Voter” shall mean an enrolled member of the 
Tribe over the age of 18 and who has registered 
to vote in the Tribe.

Jurisdiction
To the full extent that Federal law allows, and 
unless restricted by Tribal law. the Tribe's 
jurisdiction shall extend over all territory of 
the Tribe which constitutes Indian Country 
or its equivalent under federal law. and to any 
person, properly, subject, and activity within 
this territory. The Tribe's jurisdiction shall 
also extend to any person, property, subject and 
activity allowed under federal law outside the 
Tribe's Indian Country territory or its equivalent 
under federal law.

Article III
Tribal Member

Section 1. Requirements
A Tribal member shall be of those persons who:

(a) trace direct lineal descent (1) to a Mashpee 
Indian identified in the Report to the Governor 
and Council, concerning the Indians of the 
Commonwealth, Under the Act of April 16, 
1859 written by John Millon and published in 
1861 by William White, Printer to the Stare, in 
Boston, Massachusetts (also known as the 1859 
Milton Earle Report), or (2) to the union of 
Georgina Palmer and Charles Peters or Leander 
Peters and Lydia DeGrasse; and

(b) demonstrate tribal community involvement 
as set forth by ordinance; and

(c) (1) have not publicly denounced Mashpee 
tribal existence,
and (2) have not publicly denounced their 
affiliation to the Tribe; and

(d) have lived in or near Mashpee, Massachusetts, 
or have had family members actively involved 
in tribal community affairs who have lived in 
or near Mashpee. Massachusetts for at least the 
preceding 20 years.

Section 2.  Ineligibility For Tribal Membership 
No person shall be eligible to be a Tribal member 
if that person is enrolled in another Indian tribe.

Section 3.  Enrollment Committee
(a) Within 60 days of the effective date of 
this Constitution an Enrollment Committee 
composed of five tribal members shall be 
appointed for staggered terms of three years by 
a majority vote of the members of the Tribal 
Council present at a meeting called for the 
purpose of making such appointments. The 
initial term of each Committee member first 
appointed shall be randomly assigned with three 
Committee members serving three years and 
two Committee members serving two years. 
Committee members may be removed from 
office by majority vote of the members of the 
Tribal Council present 

at the meeting prior to the expiration of their 
term only for cause. Any person who holds 
any elective or appointive Tribal office or is a 
candidate for such office shall be ineligible to 
serve on the Enrollment Committee; however, 
one member of the Tribal Council may be 
allowed to serve on the Enrollment Committee. 
Any member of the Enrollment Committee 
who becomes a candidate or is elected or 
appointed to Tribal office shall automatically 
forfeit the remainder of their term of office on 
the Enrollment Committee if one member of 
the Tribal Council is currently serving on the 
Enrollment Committee.

(b)  The Enrollment Committee shall be 
responsible for enforcing Tribal enrollment laws. 
The duties of the Enrollment Committee shall 
include, but not be limited to, the following:

(1)  maintaining the Tribal membership roll; and

(2)  reviewing and approving or rejecting all 
applications for enrollment into the Tribe; 
provided that, a rejected applicant may appeal 
such decision under Section 4 of this Article.

(c)  The Enrollment Committee shall perform 
such other duties as may be delegated to the 
Committee by Ordinance.

(d)  The Enrollment Committee may issue such 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out 
Tribal enrollment law.

Section 4.  Appeal From Denial of Membership 
Application
Any person whose application for membership 
in the Tribe is rejected by the Enrollment 
Committee shall have the right to appeal such 
adverse decision to the Tribal Judiciary, but only 
after exhausting all remedies available within 
the Tribal Council. That person may appeal the 
Tribal Council's decision to the Tribal Judiciary 
according to court rules. The judgment by the 
Tribal Judiciary shall be final.

Section 5. Automatic Forfeiture of Membership 
A member shall be deemed to have automatically 
forfeited membership in the Tribe along with 
all rights and benefits to which members are 
entitled by virtue of their membership (1) 
upon enrollment in another tribe, or (2) upon a 
final finding that membership in the Tribe was 
obtained by fraud.

Section 6. Removal From Membership Roll by 
Tribal Council
If, upon the report and recommendations of 
the Enrollment Committee, the Tribal Council 
determines that an enrolled Tribal member 
lacks a required membership requirement, the 
Tribal Council may remove that person from 
the Tribal membership roll; provided that, that 
person may appeal the Tribal Council s decision 
to the Tribal Judiciary according to Tribal court 
rules. Only if a final judgment by the Tribal 
Judiciary is rendered upholding the removal 

shall that person's name be removed from the 
membership roll.

Section 7.  Relinquishment of Enrollment
Tribal members of the Tribe may relinquish 
membership in the Tribe in accordance with 
procedures established by the Enrollment 
Committee. Such Tribal member shall be 
ineligible to reapply for Tribal membership 
for a period of five years from the date of 
such relinquishment. Any minor whose Tribal 
membership is relinquished by a parent or 
legal guardian shall have the right to petition 
the Enrollment Committee for automatic 
reinstatement of Tribal membership upon 
reaching the age of 18; provided that, such 
person petitions within 90 days from the day 
that person reaches the age of 18. If such person 
fails to petition for automatic reinstatement, 
such person may apply for Tribal membership 
under Section 1 of this Article.

Section 8.  Enforcement
The Tribal Council shall enforce this Article 
by ordinance; provided that, the Tribal Council 
shall have no power to establish substantive 
requirements for Tribal membership or removal 
from the membership roll in addition to those 
established in Sections 1 or 6 of this Article, nor 
to waive any of those requirements.

Article IV
Elections

Section 1.  Voter Requirements
Any enrolled member of the Tribe who is 
registered to vote shall be entitled to vote in 
Tribal elections, except if such member is 
judicially declared menially incompetent.

Section 2.  Voting
Except as may be otherwise specified in this 
Constitution, voting in Tribal elections shall be 
by secret ballot cast al polls established by the 
Election Committee al such sites designated by 
the Election Committee. Write-in voting shall be 
permitted in accordance with such procedures as 
shall be established by the Election Committee. 
Write-in candidates must meet all eligibility 
requirements, constitutional or otherwise. No 
proxy or absentee voting shall be allowed in 
Tribal elections.

Section J. Regular and Special Elections
The Tribal Council shall provide by ordinance 
for the holding of regular elections, including 
establishing dates, times and places for holding 
such elections. The Tribal Council shall also 
provide by ordinance for the holding of special 
elections by establishing the procedure by 
which such elections may be called and held 
with adequate notice provided to registered 
Tribal voters.

Section 4.  Election Committee
(a) Within 60 days of the effective date of this 
Constitution an Election Committee composed 
of five Tribal members.

who are registered voters of the Tribe, shall be 
appointed for staggered terms of three years by 
a majority vote of the members of the Tribal 
Council present at a meeting called for the 
purpose of making such appointments. The 
initial term of each Committee member first 
appointed shall be randomly assigned with three 
Committee members serving three years and 
two Committee members serving two years. 
Committee members may be removed from 
office by a majority vote of the members of the 
Tribal Council present at the meeting prior to 
rhe expiration of their term only for cause. Any 
person who holds any elective or appointive 
Tribal office or is a candidate for such office shall 
be ineligible to serve on the Election Committee; 
however, one member of the Tribal Council may 
be allowed to serve on the Election Committee. 
Any member of the Election Committee who 
becomes a candidate or is elected or appointed 
to Tribal office shall automatically forfeit the 
remainder of their term of office on the Election 
Committee if one member of the Tribal Council 
is currently serving on the Election Committee.

(b)  The Election Committee shall be responsible 
for enforcing Tribal election laws. The duties of 
the Election Committee shall include, but shall 
not be limited to. the following:

(1)  establishing and maintaining a 

system of voter registration, and

(2)  maintaining a current list of 

registered voters of the Tribe, and

(3)  certifying eligibility of candidates 

for Tribal offices (both elective and appointive) 
according to eligibility requirements specified 
in Article VI or by Tribal ordinance, and

(4) conducting Tribal elections, and
(5)  certifying the results of Tribal 

elections.

(c)  The Election Commitlee shall perform 
such other duties as may be delegated to the 
Committee by ordinance.

(d)  The Election Committee may issue such 
regulations as may be necessary to carry out 
Tribal election ordinances.

Section 5.  Election Ordinance
The Tribal Council shall enact an election 
ordinance that shall include, but shall not be 
limited to, voter registration requirements, 
a provision for the appointment of a five- 
member Election Committee, and a provision to 
judicially resolve disputed elections.

Section 6.  First Election
(a) The first election under this Constitution shall 
be held on the date of the next regular election 
that was scheduled under the Constitution and 
Bylaws and shall be supervised and conducted 
pursuant to an election ordinance enacted by the 
Tribal Council then in office, pursuant to Section 
5 of this Article. The office of Tribal Council 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and 
Treasurer and one of the five vacancies on the 

Tribal Council which would have occurred 
for that election, shall be filled for four years. 
The remaining four member vacancies, which 
include the office of Historian, are abolished 
and shall not be filled in accordance with Article 
VI, Section 1

(a) The terms of the remaining four member 
incumbents shall be two years from the date of 
the first election, at which time their successors 
shall be duly elected and installed. Thereafter, 
there shall be an election every two years so as 
to continue the system of staggered terms of 
office.

(b) All members of the Board of Directors at the 
lime this Constitution becomes effective shall 
continue to serve and shall be entitled to exerci sc 
all powers granted by this Constitution to the 
Tribal Council until such time as their successors 
arc elected and installed in accordance with this 
Constitution.

(C) All members who are elected to the Tribal 
Council shall also serve as members of the Board 
of Directors of the Mashpee Wampanoag Indian 
Tribal Council. Inc., as well as members of the 
Board of Directors of the Old Indian Meetinghouse 
Authority, Inc. The Elected Chairperson of the 
Tribal Council shall serve as President of both 
the Wampanoag Indian Tribal Council, Inc. and 
of the Old Indian Meetinghouse Authority, 
Inc., the elected Vice Chairperson shall serve 
as Vice President of the Mashpee Wampanoag 
Indian Tribal Council, Inc. and of the Old Indian 
Meetinghouse Authority, Inc., the Secretary 
shall serve as Clerk of the Mashpee Wampanoag 
Indian Tribal Council, Inc. and of the Old 
Indian Meetinghouse Authority, Inc., and the 
Treasurer shall serve as Treasurer of the Mashpee 
Wampanoag Indian Tribal Council, Inc. and of the 
Old Indian Meetinghouse Authority, Inc.

Article V
Tribal Government Powers

Section i. Separation of Power
The Tribal Council and the Tribal Judiciary shall 
be separate and equal branches of the Tribal 
Government. Each branch shall exercise only the 
powers vested in it and shall have no authority 
over the other branch except as may be granted by 
this Constitution. Article V, Section 3 and Article 
X which separate Tribal government powers shall 
become effective upon the appointment of the 
three Judges of the Tribal Suprente Court under 
Article X of this Constitution. Until that time, 
the Tribal Council will continue to exercise all 
Tribal government powers and any reference in 
this Constitution in provisions other than Article 
V, Section 3, and Article X to Tribal Judiciary shall 
mean the Tribal Council. If the government of the 
United States of America, by final administrative 
decision and after all appeals have been exhausted, 
fails to federally recognize the Tribe, Article V, 
Section 3 and Article X shall be ineffective and 
unenforceable.

Section 2.  Tribal Council's Powers
The Tribal Council, as established in Article 
VI of this Constitution, shall be vested with all 
executive and legislative powers of the Tribe 
including the power to make and to enforce laws, 
and including such powers as may in the future 
be restored or granted to the Tribe by any law of 
the United States of America, or other authority 
This Constitution, and ordinances of the Tribal 
Council adopted under this Constitution, shall 
be the supreme law of the Tribe. The Tribal 
Council shall exercise its powers consistent with 
the letter and spirit of this Constitution.

Section 3.  Tribal Judiciarys Powers
The Tribal Judiciary, as established in Article X 
of this Constitution, shall be vested with all the 
Tribe's judicial powers.

Section 4.  Ethics in Tribal Government
Within 180 days after the adoption of this 
Constitution, the Tribal Council shall, by 
ordinance, establish a code of ethics in Tribal 
government for Tribal public officials or others, 
as it deems appropriate to meet the needs of the 
Tribe.

Article VI
Tribal Council

Section 1. Composition, Qualifications. Terms 
of Office, Officers and Committees
(a)  Except as set forth in Article IV, Section 
6, the Tribal Council shall be composed of 13 
members of the Tribe who are registered to vote, 
11 of whom, including a Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer, shall be 
elected by majority vote of all registered tribal 
voters, and two of whom, the Tribal Medicine 
Man and Tribal Chief, shall be selected by 
the general Tribal membership according to 
Tribal custom and tradition and acknowledged 
by resolution as such by all the elected Tribal 
Council members prior to taking their respective 
seal on the Tribal Council.

(b)  For a person, other than the Tribal Medicine 
Man and Tribal Chief, to be eligible for election 
or appointment to the Tribal Council that person 
shall:

(1)  be a member of the Tribe; and

(2)  be at least 25 years of age; and

(3)  be free of any felony conviction 

for the preceding five years from the date of 
consideration of eligibility; and

(4)  be nominated by at least 25 

Tribal members who are registered to vote in 
tribal elections; and

(5)  be able to demonstrate 

attendance at a minimum of six Tribal Council 
or General Tribal Membership meetings, or a 

combination of those meetings, within the 12 
months preceding the Tribal genera] election; 
and

(6)  not be related as an immediate 

family member to more than one person 
serving on the Tribal Council (i.e. mother, 
father, brother, sister, spouse, son or daughter).

(c)  The elected members of the Tribal Council 
shall serve four-year terms of office and remain 
in office until their successors are elected and 
installed. The Tribal Medicine Man and Tribal 
Chief shall serve without limit, unless removed 
by a majority vote of the Tribal membership 
present al a meeting duly called for the purpose 
of removing the Tribal Medicine Man or Tribal 
Chief.

(d)  The Tribal Council may appoint or employ 
officers, other than the Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson, Secretary or Treasurer, from within 
the membership of the Tribal Council, and 
committees, as may be necessary. If appointed 
or employed from without the Tribal Council, 
those officers shall be Tribal members and shall 
neither be counted for a quorum nor may they 
vote at Tribal Council meetings.

Section 2. Enumerated Powers of the Tribal 
Council
The Tribal Council shall be authorized to 
exercise the following powers, subject to any 
limitations imposed by Federal Law or this 
Constitution.

To promote and protect the health, 
A. 
peace, morals, education, political integrity, 
economic security and general welfare of the 
Tribe and its members.

To establish a basic departmental 
B. 
structure for the executive branch of the Tribal 
government with a delegation of appropriate 
powers to such subdivisions and agencies.

To establish procedures and 
C. 
ordinances for the conduct of all tribal 
government business operations, except where 
elsewhere precluded in this constitution.

To negotiate and enter into contracts 
D. 
and agreements with tribal, foreign, federal, 
state and local governments, private persons and 
corporate entities.

To prevent the sale, loss or transfer 
E. 
of tribal land, and to manage the disposition, 
lease or encumbrance of tribal lands or interest 
in land inherited, acquired with tribal funds or 
other tribal assets.

To establish criteria to make 
F. 
assignments of Tribal lands to members of 
the Tribe, Tribal agencies and to corporations 
wholly owned by the Tribe, and regulate the use 
of disposition of all such assignments.

To purchase, take by gift or bequest, 
G. 
or otherwise own, hold, manage and operate 
land and other assets of the Tribe.

To approve or disapprove operating 
H. 
budgets of the Tribal agencies, subdivisions and 
departments.

To prepare and present an annual 
I. 
balanced budget of Tribal operations to the 
Tribal body and in the event the budget is 
approved by a majority of the registered voters 
present and voting at the annual meeting of the 
Tribe, to allocate the funds called for by said 
budget.

To approve or disapprove allocations
J. 
or disbursements of Tribal funds (or grant or 
contract funds under the administrative control 
of the Tribe) not specifically appropriated or 
authorized in the budget approved by the Tribe.

To create or to provide by ordinance 
K. 
for the creation of organizations including 
public and private corporation and/or charters 
for any lawful purpose, which may be nonprofit 
or profit making, and to regulate the activities of 
such organizations by ordinance.

L. 
ordinances governing Tribal members.

To establish and enforce all

To levy and collect taxes and raise 
M. 
revenue to meet the needs of the Tribe or to 
support Tribal government operations subject to 
Tribal vole.

To assert as a defense to lawsuits 
N. 
against the Tribe, and to waive only by express 
written agreement, the sovereign immunity of 
the Tribe.

To establish an adjustable distribution 
O. 
of Tribal assets among the members of die Tribe 
which shall be made out of the net profits of any 
gaming enterprise after all Tribal debts then due 
have been managed and considerations given to 
future expense.

Article VII
Duties of Officers

Section I.  Duties of the Chairperson
The Chairperson shall preside over all meetings 
of the Tribal Council and shall perform the 
usual duties of a Chairperson including, but not 
limited to, acting as the official spokesperson for 
the Tribe, engaging in public relations, serving 
as coordinator over all Tribal government 
activities, and exercising any authority delegated 
to the Chairperson by the Tribal Council.

Section 2.  Duties of the Vice-Chairperson
The Vice-Chairperson shall assist the 
Chairperson when called upon to do so and in 
the absence of the Chairperson shall preside 
over the meeting. When so presiding, the Vice
Chairperson shall have the rights, privileges, 
duties, and responsibilities of the Chairperson.

Section 3.  Duties of the Secretary
The Secretary shall be responsible for all 
correspondence issued by the Tribal Council, 
keep an accurate record of all matters transacted 
at meetings of the Tribal Council, and perform 
those other duties as required by the Tribal 
Council.

Section 4.  Duties of the Treasurer
The Treasurer shall accept, receive, preserve, and 
safeguard all Tribal funds or special funds for 
which the Tribal Council is acting as trustee or 
custodian. The Treasurer shall deposit all funds 
in appropriate insured depositories as the Tribal 
Council shall direct, make or preserve a faithful 
record of those funds, and report on all receipts 
and expenditures and the amount and nature of 
all funds in the Tribal treasury accounts at each 
regular meeting of the Tribal Council, al each 
regular general Tribal membership meeting, 
or al such other times as directed by the Tribal 
Council. Alter the United States of America 
federally recognizes the Tribe, an audit of 
accounts shall be made once a year and at such 
other times as the Tribal Council may require. 
All checks drawn upon Tribal funds will be 
handled according to the accounting procedure 
manual approved by the Tribal Council. The 
Treasurer shall be required to give satisfactory 
bond to the Tribal Council and that bond shall 
be paid from Tribal funds.

Section 5.  Duties of Committees, Department 
Deads or Appointive Officers
The duties of all committees, department heads 
created or officers appointed by the Tribal 
Council shall be clearly defined by resolution of 
the Tribal Council at the trine of their creation 
or appointment. Those committees, department 
heads or officers shall report to the Tribal 
Council from time to time as it may require and 
die Tribal Council may review their activities 
and decisions.

Article VIII
Vacancies and Removal of Tribal Officials

Section 1. Recall
(a)  The registered voters of the Tribe may recall 
any elected official of the Tribe from office 
in accordance with (he procedure set forth in 
subsection (b) of this Section; provided that, 
recall shall not be a remedy against alleged 
action by a Tribal official which may constitute 
a major crime.

(b)  The procedure by which an elected Tribal 
official may be recalled shall be as follows:

(1)  Petitioners Committee.
Any 100 registered voters of 
the Tribe may commence recall 
proceedings by filing with the 
Election Committee

an affidavit (1) stating their names, 
addresses, and the names and 
addresses of three representatives 
of the Petitioners Committee to 
which ail notices regarding the 
petition are to be sent, and (2) 
stating that they will constitute the 
Petitioners Committee and will be 
responsible for circulating the 
petition and filing it in proper form, 
and (3) naming the Tribal official 
sought to be recalled, and (4) stating 
in less than 250 words the specific 
reasons upon which it is alleged that 
the named Tribal official should be 
recalled. If more than one official is 
sought to be recalled, there shall be 
separate affidavits of charges filed 
for each such official. The 
Election Committee shall promptly 
thereafter serve in person or 
by registered mail a copy of the 
affidavit of the Petitioners 
Committee upon the named 
official. The named official shall 
have 15 days after receipt of service 
to file an affidavit in defense with 
the Election Committee answering, 
in less than 250 words, the charges 
made against him or her.

(2) Certificate of Sufficiency 
(A) Certificate of Sufficiency.

Within 5 working days after a petition is filed, 
the Election Committee shall certify as to its 
sufficiency.

(B) If Certified Insufficient. 

If the petition is certified insufficient, the 
Election Committee shall state in the certificate 
with particularity the reasons it is insufficient. 
A copy of the certificate of insufficiency shall 
be promptly sent to the Petitioners Committee 
by registered mail, or served personally upon, 
the Petitioners Committee. A petition certified 
insufficient for lack of required number of valid 
signatures may be supplemented once, and for 
this purpose an appropriate number of petition 
forms shall be mailed or given personally to 
the Petitioners Committee along with the 
certificate of insufficiency. Such supplemental 
petition shall comply with the requirements 
of this section. Petitioners Committee shall 
have 15 days after receipt of the certificate of 
insufficiency to file a supplemental petition 
with the Election Committee. Within 5 working 
days after the filing of the supplemental 
petition, the Election Committee shall 
certify as to the sufficiency of the petition as 
supplemented and promptly send a copy of 
such certificate to the Petitioners Committee by 
registered mail, or shall serve a copy personally 
upon the Petitioners Committee.

(C) If Certified Sufficient. 

If an original petition or a petition a 

supplemented in accordance with Section 1(b) 
(2) (B) of this Article is certified as sufficient 
by the Election Committee, it shall promptly 
send a copy of the certificate of sufficiency by 
registered mail to. or serve it personally upon, 
the Petitioners Committee, and the certificate 
of sufficiency shall promptly be presented to 
the Tribal Council. Immediately thereafter, 
the Tribal Council shall promptly send by mail 
to all registered tribal voters a copy of the 
certified petition.

(c) Recall Election
(l) The Election Committee shall 
hold a meeting of the general Tribal members 
giving each side equal time to present their 
arguments and to answer any questions posed 
by participants al a hearing. Immediately 
following the hearing, a recall election shall 
occur. The affirmative vote of 60 percent of 
those voting at the recall election shall effect 
a recall of the official from office; provided 
that, at least 40 percent of the total number 
of registered Tribal voters who voted in the 
next immediately preceding annual election 
of Officers vote in the recall election. The 40 
percent requirement shall be certified based 
on the attendance log at the beginning of the 
hearing. If the 40 percent requirement is not 
met then the bearing and recall election shall 
be immediately canceled. In the event the 
official is recalled, the office shall be deemed 
vacant and shall be filled in accordance with 
Section 4 of this Article.

(2) The ballot for the recall election 

shall, for each official sought to be recalled if 
more than one, state the grounds set forth in 
the recall petition for demanding such recall 
and the answer of the official sought to be 
recalled. The ballot shall set forth the following 
question: Shall (name of the official sought to 
be recalled) be recalled from the office 
(title of office). Following such question shall 
be two choices of words, “yes" or “no” on 
separate lines with the blank space Io the right 
of each in which the voter shall indicate by 
marking a cross “x" for his or her vote for or 
against recall.

Section 2. Expulsion and Suspension of 
Members of the Tribal Council
(a) The Tribal Council shall expel a member 
of the Tribal Council from office on grounds 
of failure to attend three successive regular 
meetings of the Tribal Council in a given 
calendar year without good reason as determined 
by the Tribal Council, lack of a required 
qualification for holding office, or occurrence of 
a disqualification for office.

(b) The Tribal Council shall by affirmative 
vote of 7 members of the Tribal Council expel 
a member of the Tribal Council from office on 
grounds of malfeasance or nonfeasance. The 

Tribal Council member sought to be expelled 
for malfeasance or nonfeasance shall be 
notified in person or by registered mail at least 
10 days before the holding of any meeting at 
which the member's expulsion from office is 
to be considered. The notice shall set forth the 
alleged grounds for expulsion with specificity. 
The member in question shall be given full 
opportunity to be heard at such meeting and 
to confront any and all adverse witnesses. If 
the Tribal Council votes to expel the member 
in question, the grounds for removal shall be 
SCI forth with specificity in the minutes of the 
meeting, and the Tribal Council s decision 
shall be subject to prompt review by the Tribal 
Judiciary at the request of the expelled member.

In the event the decision of the Tribal Council 

(c) 
to expel the member of the Tribal Council in 
question is upheld by the Tribal Judiciary, the 
office shall be deemed vacant and shall be filled 
in accordance with Section 4 of this Article.

(d)  Any vacancy in the Tribal Council whether 
by death, resignation, recall, suspension or 
removal shall also result in a vacancy on the 
Board of Directors of the Mashpee Wampanoag 
Tribal Council. Inc. and also on the Board of 
Directors of the Old Indian Meeting House 
Authority. Inc.

(e)  A member of the Tribal Council may be 
suspended from office pending the appeal of the 
member s conviction of a major crime by the 
vote of five members of the Tribal Council.

Section 3. Automatic Vacancies
(a)  The office of any elected Tribal official shall 
be deemed to be automatically vacant upon the 
official's death, resignation, or conviction of 
a major crime. Resignation of office shall be 
written and shall be deemed to be effective as of 
the date tendered unless otherwise designated in 
the resignation document. Major crime within 
the meaning of this subsection means any crime 
included in 18U.S.C. 1153, or any amendment 
thereto, and any equivalent crime defined under 
state or Tribal law.

(b)  Any vacancy in office which occurs under 
this section shall be filled in accordance with 
Section 4 of this Article.

Section 4. The filling of Vacancies In Office 
(a) Except as provided in this Constitution, any 
vacancy in the office of an elected Tribal official 
shall be filled as follows:

(1)  For a vacancy that occurs 
within (he calendar year, the Tribal Council 
shall appoint within 30 days of such vacancy 
the candidate that received the highest number 
of votes next to the person who vacated rhe 
office that is intended to be filled under this 
Section.

(2)  If any additional vacancies 

occur in the same calendar year, then the 
Tribal Council shall immediately issue a 
10-day notice to the registered voters of the 

Tribe informing them of the vacancy and that 
nominations shall be taken at the next monthly 
general Tribal membership meeting 
following the end of the notice period; and 
further providing, that at the monthly general 
Tribal membership meeting following the 
meeting where nominations were made, a 
vote will be taken on the nominations with The 
nominee receiving the highest number of votes 
filling the vacancy.

Paragraphs (1) and (2) of this subsection (a) 

(3) 
shall not apply to fill the vacancy in the office 
of Chairperson. Such vacancy shall be filled in 
accordance with Section 6 of this Article.

(b)  Any Tribal official who, by operation of this 
Article, vacates his office shall not be eligible 
for succession to that office.

(c)  Any Tribal member appointed to office under 
the provisions of this Section shall be deemed 
to be subject to all provisions of this Article, 
and other Articles of this Constitution, and to 
other Tribal ordinances generally applicable to 
elected Tribal officials; and that Tribal official's 
particular office.

Section 5. Tribal Judiciary Excluded
This Article shall not be applicable to the 
removal of Tribal Judges, nor to the filling of 
any vacancies in the office of Tribal Judge.

Section 6. Succession to Chairperson and Vice
Chairperson
In the event the office of the Chairperson becomes 
vacant, then the Vice-Chairperson shall become 
Chairperson and the office of Vice-Chairperson 
shall become vacant and filled in accordance 
with Section 4 of this Article. In the event the 
offices of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson 
become vacant on the same calendar day. 
then the officer of the Tribal Council which is 
highest on the following list and in accordance 
With the order listed in Article VII, and who 
is not under disability to discharge the power 
and duties of the office of Chairperson shall 
act as Chairperson. Secretary and Treasurer. 
In such event, the office of Vice-Chairperson 
and the office vacated to assume the office of 
Chairperson shall be filled in accordance with 
Section 4 of this Article.

Article IX
Procedures of the Tribal Council

Section 1. Meetings of the Tribal Council
(a) The Tribal Council shall meet in official 
session at least once a monthly every calendar 
year at such time and place as shall be established 
by ordinance. The order of business for any 
such meeting shall be posted in accordance 
with Section 3 of this Article. Other business, 
however, may also be transacted at such meeting 
if the Tribal Council votes to consider such other 
business. The quorum for a regular meeting of 
the Tribal Council shall be nine members of the 
Tribal Council

(b) Special Meetings

(1)  Calling and Notice
Special meetings of the Tribal 

Council shall be called by the Chairperson of 
the Tribal Council at that person's discretion or 
upon the written request of any three members 
of the Tribal Council; provided that, al least 
72 hours written notice of such meetings shall 
be given to each Tribal Council member, by 
personal service or by registered mail sent to 
that person's usual place of residence, or by 
electronic means that documents receipt of the 
notice. Notice, however, shall be considered 
waived by attendance at the meeting. Notice 
to Tribal members shall be posted as provided 
in Section 3 of this Article promptly after 
such meeting is called. The quorum for a 
special meeting of the Tribal Council shall be. 
nine members of the Tribal Council.

(2)  Business
No business shall be conducted 

at any special meeting of the Tribal Council 
unless the business has been stated in the 
notice of that meeting. Any business, however, 
which may lawfully come before a regular 
meeting may be transacted at a special meeting 
if all the members of the entire Tribal Council 
are present and consent is given in writing.

(3)  Emergency Meetings 
An emergency meeting of 

the Tribal Council may be called by the 
Chairperson of the Tribal Council at that 
person's discretion or upon the request of any 
three members of the Tribal Council upon less 
than 72 hours written notice if that meeting is 
necessary for the preservation or protection of 
the immediate health, peace, safety, or properly 
of the Tribe. The Tribal Council shall make 
every effort to give maximum practical notice 
to each member of the Tribal Council for that 
meeting, and the notice shall be posted as 
provided in Section 3 of this Article promptly 
after that meeting is called. No business 
other than that staled in the notice shall be 
conducted. The quorum for an emergency 
meeting of the Tribal Council shall be seven 
members of the Tribal Council.

(c)  Open Meetings and Executive Sessions 
Ail meetings of the Tribal Council called under 
this Article shall be open to Tribal members 
who shall have a reasonable opportunity to be 
heard under such rules as the Tribal Council 
may prescribe; provided that the Tribal Council 
may meet in executive session for such purposes 
as shall be set forth in the rules of the Tribal 
Council; further provided that, no vote by the 
Tribal Council shall be taken while convened in 
executive session.

The Tribal Council may determine not to keep 
a record of all or any part of the discussion in 
executive session. The general reason for that 

determination shall be recorded and a record 
shall be kept of any action taken in executive 
session. The record may be withheld from 
inspection by Tribal members pending final 
disposition of the matter concerned.

(d)  Organization and Rules of the Tribal 
Council. The Tribal Council shall adopt by 
motion standing written rules governing its 
own organization and procedure, subject to the 
approval of the general Tribal membership at a 
meeting called for such specific purpose. Those 
rules shall be open and available to review by 
Tribal members. Any amendments to those 
rules shall be subject to the approval of the 
genera! Tribal membership at a meeting called 
for such specific purpose.

(e)  Voting by the Tribal Council

(1)  Ordinances
Except for emergency ordinances, 

every ordinance shall be adopted at a 
regular meeting of the Tribal Council by the 
affirmative vote of at least seven members of 
the Tribal Council; provided that, the quorum 
for those meetings shall he seven members 
of the Tribal Council.

(2)  Resolutions and Motions
Every resolution and motion shall 

be adopted by rhe affirmative vote of at least a 
majority of the members of the Tribal Council 
present at a regular or special meeting of the 
Tribal Council; provided that the quorum for 
those meetings shall be nine members of the 
Tribal Council.

Section 2. Ordinances, Resolutions, and 
Motions
Promptly after the effective date of this 
Constitution, the Tribal Council shall enact an 
ordinance establishing procedures for adopting, 
amending, or rescinding ordinances, resolutions 
and motions, and handling of Tribal records.

Section 3. Posting Procedure
The following shall be the procedure of the Tribal 
Council tn posting any notice, ordinance, or 
other document as required by this Constitution 
or by Tribal ordinance.

(1)  The Tribal Council shall 
designate by ordinance no fewer than two 
public places where that posting shall be 
made. If any posting place is to be changed, 
the Tribal Council shall make such change by 
ordinance.

(2)  Posting of the notice, ordinance 

or other document shall take place as soon as 
practicable.

Section 4. General Tribal Membership 
Meeting
(a) There shall be a General Tribal Membership 
meeting called at least once a month by the 
Tribal Council and open to all tribal members. 
The purpose of (he meeting shall be io discuss 
problems and issues concerning Tribal affairs; 
to review the policies, goals, and priorities of 
the Tribal Council; to review the functioning of 
Tribal programs and to make recommendations 
to the Tribal Council for change.

(b) The Tribal Council shall set the meeting 
for the second Sunday of each month at such 
appropriate time and place and shall provide 
reasonable notice to Tribal members of that 
meeting by posting such notice in accordance 
with Section 3 of this Article.

(c) Special General Tribal Membership 
Meeting.

(i) The Tribal Council may call a 
special General Tribal Membership meeting 
when it deems appropriate.

(it) Tribal members may require 

the Tribal Council to call a General Tribal 
Membership meeting for a specified purpose or 
purposes by presenting to the Tribal Council a 
petition with 100 signatures of Tribal members 
over the age of 18, which petition shall specify 
the purpose or purposes for calling the meeting. 
The meeting called under that petition shall 
be convened no later titan 20 days following 
the submission of a valid petition which 
shall be certified as valid within 72 hours of 
submission.

(d) Annual Tribal Membership Meeting

(e) The Tribal Council shall set a date and a lime 
to present a balanced budget and discuss other 
Tribal business.

Article X
Tribal Judiciary

Section 1.  Structure
(a) The Tribal Judiciary shall be composed of 
one Supreme Court and of such lower courts as 
are designated to be established in this Article, 
and as may be established by ordinance by the 
Tribal Council as it deems appropriate to meet 
the needs of the Tribe,

(b) The Supreme Court of the Tribe shall have 
jurisdiction over appeals from all final decisions 
of the lower courts of the Tribe. The Supreme 
Court shall be composed of three Judges, 
Supreme Court Judges may, if necessary and if 
so instructed by the Tribal Council also serve as 
Judges of the lower courts. In such a situation, 
however, the Supreme Court Judge shall be 
disqualified from participating in a review of 
any decision entered by that judge while sitting 
as a lower court judge.

(c) The Tribal Council shall determine and 
establish the number of lower trial courts 

necessary to serve the judicial needs of the Tribe. 
Such trial courts shall have general and original 
jurisdiction over all cases of a civil or criminal 
nature. Each trial court shall be presided over 
by one Judge.

(d) If the Tribal Council establishes special 
kinds of lower courts with original jurisdiction 
over specified subject areas, the Tribal Council 
shall specify whether such jurisdiction is 
exclusive or concurrent with the jurisdiction of 
the trial courts established in subsection (c) of 
this Section.

(e) If the Tribal Council establishes an 
intermediate level of courts to hear appeals 
from all final decisions of the lower courts, the 
Supreme Court shall hear appeals only from 
decisions of the intermediate courts of appeals. 
In addition, the Tribal Council may authorize the 
Supreme Court to exercise its discretion in all or 
designated kinds of cases in deciding whether to 
hear an appeal in any particular case.

Section 2.  Appointment and Term of Office
(a) The Tribal Council shall by ordinance 
establish a procedure for selection of Tribal 
Judges.

(b) Tribal Judges shall be appointed by six or 
more votes of the Tribal Council.

(c) Lower Court Judges shall be appointed to a 
term of five years.

(d) Supreme Court Judges shall be appointed to 
staggered terms of eight years. The initial term 
of each of the first three Supreme Court Judges 
appointed shall be randomly assigned and one 
judge shall serve four years, one judge shall 
serve six years and one judge shall serve eight 
years.

Section 3.  Compensation
Tribal Judges shall receive for their services a 
reasonable compensation, as fixed from time to 
time by the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council 
shall not diminish the compensation of a Tribal 
Judge during that Judge's term of office.

Section 4. Qualifications and Disqualifications 
(a) To hold the office of Tribal Judge, a person 
shall be a member of an American Indian tribe 
that is recognized by the Tribe, be at least 25 
years of age, have a minimum education of a 
high school graduate or an equivalent and meet 
such other requirements as shall be set forth by 
ordinance.

(b) No person shall be eligible to be appointed to 
the office of Tribal Judge who has been convicted 
of a felony or a crime of moral turpitude.

Section 5.  Removal from Office by Tribal 
Council and Automatic Vacancies
(a) Tribal Judges may be removed from office by 
the Tribal Council by the affirmative vote of at 
least seven members of the entire Tribal Council, 
but only upon grounds of inability to carry out the 
duties of the office, failure to carry out the duties

of the office, or lack of a requisite qualification 
for serving as a Tribal Judge. The Tribal Council 
shall notify the Tribal Judge in question and die 
Supreme Court, in writing, not less than 20 
days prior to the meeting at which the Judge's 
removal is to be considered and voted upon. The 
notice shall specify the charge or charges and 
shall state the facts in support thereof. The Tribal 
Judge in question shall have full opportunity at 
the meeting at which that Judge's removal is 
to be considered and decided upon to examine 
all adverse witnesses and to present witnesses. 
The decision of the Tribal Council shall be final 
and not appealable to the Tribal Judiciary. The 
Supreme Court may. upon receipt of notice of 
the removal charges, suspend the Tribal Judge 
in question from office pending final action of 
the Tribal Council al the meeting.

(b) The office of any Tribal Judge who is 
convicted of a felony or a crime of moral 
turpitude, who dies, who resigns, or who is 
removed shall be deemed to be automatically 
vacant. Resignation from office shall be written 
and shall be deemed to be effective as of the 
date tendered unless otherwise designated in the 
resignation document.

Section 6.  Rules of Tribal Courts
The Supreme Court shall by order establish 
written rules of procedure and ethics for all 
Tribal Courts. Such rules may from time to time 
be amended as deemed necessary or appropriate 
by the Supreme Court. The Supreme Court shall 
consult with live Judges of die lower courts in 
establishing rules of procedure for the lower 
courts.

Section 7.  Records and Court Clerk
The Supreme Court shall implement the system 
of keeping records of proceedings of the Tribal 
Judiciary. The Supreme Court shall appoint a 
court clerk who shall be responsible for keeping 
the records of the Judiciary and generally 
for adminislering the daily business of the 
Judiciary.

Section 8.  Appropriations
The Tribal Council shall give priority for 
appropriations of such funds as may be 
necessary to enable the Tribal Judiciary to carry 
out the provisions of this Article.

Section 9. Enforcement
The Tribal Council shall implement this Article 
by ordinance.

Article XI
Civil and Aboriginal Rights

Section I.  Civil Rights
The Tribe, in exercising its power of self
government over persons subject to tribal 
jurisdiction, shall not:

(a)  Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free 
exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom 
of speech, or of the press, or the right of the 
people peaceably to assemble and to petition for 
a redress of grievances;

(b)  Violate the right of the people to be secure in 
their persons, houses, papers, and effects against 
unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue 
warrants, but upon probable cause, supported by 
oath or affirmation, and particularly describing 
the place to be searched and the person or thing 
to be seized;

(c)  Subject any person for the same offense to be 
twice put in jeopardy;

(d)  Compel any person in any criminal case to 
be a witness against himself;

(e)  Take any private property for a public use 
without just compensation;

(f)  Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding 
the right to a speedy and public trial, to 
be informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses 
against him. to have compulsory process for 
obtaining witnesses in his favor, and at his own 
expense to have the assistance of counsel for his 
defense;

(g)  Require excessive bail, impose excessive 
fines, inflict cruel and unusual punishments, and 
in no event impose for conviction of any one 
offense any penalty or punishment greater than 
imprisonment for a term of one year and a fine 
of $5,000, or both;

(h)  Deny to any person within its jurisdiction 
the equal protection of its laws or deprive 
any person of liberty or property without due 
process of law;

(i)  Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; 
or

(j)  Deny to any person accused of an offense 
punishable by imprisonment the right, upon 
request, to a trial by jury of not less than six 
persons.

Section 2.  Aboriginal Rights
The members of the Tribe retain their aboriginal 
rights subject only to Tribal laws. Any oilier 
person shall have no such rights.

Section 3.  Rights Retained by the People
The enumeration in this Constitution of certain 
rights shall not be construed to deny or disparage 
others retained by the people.

of the registered voters of die Tribe voting 
on a referred ordinance vote to approve such 
ordinance, then it shall be considered approved 
upon certification of the election results.

(c) Voting Percentage Requirements
No initiative or referendum election shall be 
effective unless at least 15 percent of the total 
number of registered voters of the Tribe vote in 
that election.

Article XIII
Amendments

This Constitution may be amended by a majority 
vole of the registered voters of the Tribe voting at 
an election called for that purpose by the Tribal 
Council provided at least 30 percent of those 
registered to vote shall vote in such election. 
The election shall be conducted in accordance 
with this Constitution.

Article XIV
Certificate of Results of Election and
Savings

This Constitution, when adopted by a majority 
vote of the voters of the Tribe voting in an 
election called for that purpose by the Board of 
Directors of the Mashpee Wampanoag Indian 
Tribal Council, Inc. shall be effective from the 
date the Tribal Council certifies by resolution the 
election results. All tribal laws, resolutions, and 
policy of whatever nature adopted before the 
effective date of this Constitution shall continue 
in effect to the extent they are consistent with 
this Constitution.

Article XII
Initiative and Referendum

Section 1. General Authority
(a) Initiative, Registered voters of the Tribe may 
propose any ordinance to the Tribal Council for 
consideration, in accordance with procedures 
set forth by ordinance, except ordinances 
concerning the budget of the Tribal government, 
appropriations of funds, levy of taxes, salaries 
of Tribal officials, employees or appointees, 
emergency ordinances, distribution of funds as 
per capita payments or ordinances establishing 
Tribal businesses. If the Tribal Council votes 
not to enact the proposed ordinance, or if the 
Tribal Council votes to enact the proposed 
ordinance with substantive amendments, then 
the proposed ordinance, in the original form and 
in the amended form if any, shall be submitted 
to the registered voters of the Tribe at a Tribal 
election for their approval or rejection.

(b) Referendum

(1) By action of registered 

voters. Registered voters of the Tribe may 
require the Tribal Council to consider the 
repeal of any ordinance, in accordance with 
procedures set forth by ordinance, except 
ordinances concerning the budget of the Tribal 
government, appropriations of funds, levy of 
taxes, salaries of Tribal officials, employees or 
appointees, emergency ordinances, distribution 
of funds as per capita payments or ordinances 
establishing Tribal businesses. If the Tribal 
Council fails to repeal such ordinance, the 
ordinance shall be submitted to the registered 
voters of the Tribe at a Tribal election for their 
approval or repeal in accordance with Section 2 
of this Article.

(2) By action of the Tribal Council. 

The Tribal Council, on its own motion, may 
submit at a Tribal election any proposed 
ordinance or other proposed action of the Tribal 
Council to a vote of the registered voters of the 
Tribe for their approval or rejection.

(c) The Tribal Council shall implement this 
Article by ordinance.

Section 2. Results of Election
(a) Initiative
If a majority of the registered voters of the Tribe 
voting on a proposed initiated ordinance vote 
in its favor, then it shall be considered effective 
upon certification of the election results. If 
conflicting ordinances are approved at the same 
election, then the one receiving the greater 
number of affirmative votes shall prevail.

(b) Referendum
If a majority of the registered voters of the 
Tribe voting on a referred ordinance vote for 
repeal, then it shall be considered repealed upon 
certification of the election results. If a majority 

II. By-Laws of the Mashpee Wampanoag Tribal Council, Inc.
 
 

ARTICLE I
NAME AND LOCATION

 
 The name of the organization shall be the 
Mashpee Wampanoag Indian Tribal Council 
Inc. with headquarters in the Town of Mashpee. 
County of Barnstable, Commonwealth of 
Massachusetts.
 
 

PURPOSE
 
 Section L
The purpose of the Council is to raise the 
socio-economic and spiritual level of the 
Mashpee Wampanoag to the level where they 
may compete with present day society.

The Tribal Council shall assist in the quest 
for self Determination in such a way that will 
retain the Wampanoag History and culture and 
preservation of tribal land.

Section 2.
The Mashpee Wampanoag Indian Tribal 
Council will develop educational, employment 
and vocational training programs.

Section 3.
The Mashpee Wampanoag Indian Tribal 
Council will acquire Common lands for 
eligibility in acquiring Federal Recognition and 
Indian Grants or funds that may be available, 
as well as for means of revenue sharing on a 
local level.

Section 4.
The Mashpee Wampanoag Indian Tribal 
Council. Inc. in conjunction with the Tribe will 
establish rules and regulations that pertain to 
all business of the Tribal Council

Section 5.
The Mashpee Wampanoag Indian Tribal 
Council will be a Non-Profit Organization.
 
 

ARTICLE II
COUNCIL MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Tribal Members
Tribal members of the corporation shall 
consist of those persons who have qualified for 
membership in accordance with the provisions 
of Article III of the Constitution of the Mashpee 
Wampanoag Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE III
MEETINGS OF MEMBER 
CORPORATION)

 
 Section I.
Meetings shall be held on the second Sunday 
of each month, at 2 o clock P.M., unless 
otherwise advertised. They shall start at 2:00 
p.m. and end at 4:00 p.m.

Section 2. Annual Meetings
The annual meeting of the members of the 
Corporation shall be held on the second Sunday 
in February. The date and lime to be determined 
by the Nomination Committee for the purpose 
of electing officers and/or directors and for the 
transaction of such business as may properly 
come before them.

Officers and/or Directors shall be elected by a 
plurality vote of the members present, by secret 
ballot.

Section 3.
All business relative to the Corporation shall be 
presented at the monthly meeting.

Section 4.
The President shall moderate Corporate meetings 
and appoint any committee he/she deems 
necessary and shall be ex-officio members of 
all committees, except the Nominating and 
Membership Committees.

Section 5.
The Vice President shall preside in the absence 
of the President. In the event that both officers 
are absent it will be the duty of a Board Member 
to chair the meeting.

Section 6.
The meetings will be held with a quorum of 
fifteen (15) members present, but lesser number 
may adjourn a meeting.

Section 7.
Special meetings may be called by the 
President, as directed by the Board of Directors, 
or written requires of and (10) ten members of 
the Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV
BOARD OF DIRECTORS

 
 Section I.
The Management of die Council shall be vested 
in the Board of Directors and it shall conduct the 
business of the Corporation.

The Board of Directors shall have the authority 
to delegate specific duties and responsibilities to 
the Board and other Officers provided that such 
administrative policy does not conflict with 
action taken by the membership at duly noticed 
and convened meetings.

The Board of Directors shall conduct, manage, 
and control the affairs of the Council and make 
such rules consistent with these bylaws as they 
deem necessary or proper for the guidance of 
the officers, employees and for the conduct of 
the Council.

Section 2.  Size of Board
The number of elected Directors which

shall constitute the Board of Directors shall be 
thirteen (13). The Directors shall be elected by the 
members of the corporation every year. Each 
Director must be a member of the corporation. In 
addition to the Directors elected by the members 
of the Corporation, the Board of Directors shall 
also include the officers of the Corporation. A 
total of eleven (II) Directors are to be elected.

The Medicine Man and Tribal Council are 
automatically members of the Board of 
Directors, with full voting privileges.

Section 3.
Each member of the Board of Directors shall be 
elected by ballot of the members of the Council 
and shall hold office for a term of four years 
from the date of his/her election and until his 
successor is elected. The Directors shall be 
eligible for re-nomination and election as many 
limes as the members of the Corporation may 
desire.

Section 4. Vacancy
Vacancies in office shall be filled in accordance 
with the provisions of Section 4 of Article VIII 
of the Constitution.

Section 5. Meeting Place
The Board of Directors may hold meetings at 
a designated place, at such times as they deem 
necessary and desirable.

Section 6. Quorum
A quorum for the transaction of business at any 
meeting of the Board of Directors shall be seven 
(7) members of the Board.

Section 7. Special Meetings
Special meetings may be called by the President 
acting alone or by at least three (3) Directors.

Section 8. Attendance
Board members shall attend all regularly called 
meetings of the Board, or send due notice of 
non-attendance. Members absent from three (3) 
consecutive Board of Director meetings without 
due cause shall be subject to expulsion from the 
Board of Directors on grounds of failure to attend 
such three (3) successive regular meetings of 
the Board in a given calendar year without good 
reason as determined by the Board of Directors, 
lack of a required qualification for holding 
office, or occurrence of a disqualification for 
office.
 
 

ARTICLE V
DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Officers
The officers of this corporation shall consist 
of a President, Vice President. Secretary, and 
Treasurer.

Section 2.  The President
He/shc shall preside at all meetings of the 

Corporation and the Board of Directors. He/she 
may appoint the chairman of all committees 
which may be created and he/she shall have 
the general powers and duties which are 
usually vested in the office of President of the 
Corporation. As the need arises, the President 
shall appoint special committees who shall 
report to the Board meetings upon completion 
of their work.

Section 3.  The Vice President
Hc/she shall perform the duties of the President 
in case of absence, resignation or inability of the 
latter to act. The Vice President shall perform 
such duties and have such powers as the Board 
of Directors may from time to time prescribe. In 
the event that both officers are absent it will be 
(he duty of a Board Officer to chair the meeting, 
by descending order.

Section 4.  The Treasurer
The Treasurer shall receive all monies of the 
Corporation and have custody thereof. He/ 
she shall cause to be kepi a full account of all 
monies received and paid out and shall make 
such reports thereof to the Board of Directors 
and Council as they may require.

Section 5.  The Secretary
The Secretary shall keep the minutes of all 
meetings of the Board of Directors and shall 
perform the duties and functions customarily 
performed by the Secretary.

Section 6.
All officers shall at the termination of their 
tenure turn over forthwith to their successors all 
papers, materials and documents of their office 
in the Wampanoag Indian Tribal Council, Inc.
 
 

ARTICLE VI 
ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1.
Elections of members of the Board of Directors 
are governed by Article IV of the Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VII 
AMENDMENTS

 
 These By-laws may be amended by a majority of 
those members present and voting at a regularly 
or specially noticed meeting of the Corporation 
provided that:

A. That the proposed amendment or revision 
be presented at the meeting prior to the one in 
which it will be voted upon.

B. A two thirds majority of the members present 
and voting shall be required for (he vole on 
amendment or revision on by-laws.

Bylaws adopted 1974
Bylaws revised 1978
Accepted April 1979
Edited February 1995
Bylaws revised June 2004

III. Certification of Constitution and Bylaws Votes
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS VOTES

 
 We, the undersigned members of the Tribal council and Board of 

Directors do hereby certify that a meeting duly noticed and held on Saturday, 

June 26, 2004 at which a quorum was present it was voted by a two-thirds 

majority of those Tribal Members present and voting to adopt a new 

constitution of the mashpee Wampanoag Indian Tribe and it was further 

voted to amend the Bylaws of the Mashpee Wampanoag Indian Tribal 

Council, Inc. the amended bylaws and the newly adopted Constitution 

are hereby determined to be in full force and effect as of this date.

Signed this 28lh day of June, 2004.

P.O. Box 1048

Mashpee, Massachusetts 02649

Ph (508) 477-5508 Fax (508) 477-1218 

www. mashpeewampanoagtribe. com

