 
  
 CONSTITUTION OF THE 
 
MECHOOPDA INDIAN TRIBE 
OF CHICO RANCHERIA, CALIFORNIA

 
 PREAMBLE:

We, the members of the Mechoopda Indian Tribe of Chico Rancheria, Butte County, State of 
California, in order to implement our sovereign status as a Federally recognized Indian Tribe; to 
promote our common welfare as tribal members and as a political entity; and to secure to 
ourselves and our descendants the rights, powers and privileges of tribal sovereignty; do hereby 
approve and adopt this Constitution pursuant to the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, 
(48 Stat. 984, 25 U.S.C 461 et. seq.), as amended and the judgment entered in Scotts Valley 
Band of Porno Indians of the Sugar Bowl Rancheria, et. al v. United States of America, et. al. U. 
S. District Court for the Northern District of California No. C-86-3660 WWS (N. D. California). 
When adopted and approved, this Constitution shall supersede any previous governing 
document for the Mechoopda Indian Tribe of the Chico Rancheria.

Article I - Name:

The name of this tribal organization shall be the Mechoopda Indian Tribe of Chico Rancheria. 
California, hereafter referred to in this Constitution as the 'Mechoopda Indian Tribe,’ or *Tribe."

Article II  - Territory:

The jurisdiction of the Tribe shall extend to all lands and territory owned by the Tribe as of the 
date of the approval of this Constitution, whether or not such lands and territory are held in trust 
for the Tribe by the United States, and to such other lands and territory as may be hereafter 
acquired legally by and for the Tribe.

Article III - Membership:

Section 1. Membership Criteria of the Mechoopda Indian Tribe shall consist of:

All persons who are listed as distributees or dependent members in the Plan for 
(a) 
Distribution of the Assets of the Chico Rancheria as approved by the Undersecretary of the 
Interior April 22, 1960 as published in Federal Register 32, No. 106 June 2, 1967;

(b) 
the Interior, from W.C. Randolph, Clerk, Redding office;

All person listed in the April 13, 1914, letter to H.G. Wilson, Supervisor, Department of 

Any person who is a lineal descendant of an individual eligible for membership under 
(c) 
subsections (a) or (b) above, regardless whether the ancestor through whom eligibility is claimed 
is living or deceased:

(d) 
ordinance referred to in Section 3 of this Article, that he/she is of Mechoopda Indian descent;

Any person who meets the membership criteria to be established in the enrollment 

Any other person determined by the Tribal Council or membership, in accordance with 
(e) 
criteria of the enrollment ordinance to be established thereunder to be eligible for membership or 
honorary adoption into the Tribe;

All persons of Indian blood whose name appears on the 1994 Base Roll of the 
(f) 
Mechoopda Indian Tribe approved by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that this roll may be 

corrected, within six (8) months after approval of this Constitution by the General Membership, 
with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Section 2. Dual Enrollment A person who is officially enrolled with or Is a recognized 
member of some ocher tribe, band, or Rancheria shall not be enrolled with the Mechoopda Indian 
Tribe unless he/she relinquishes membership with the other band or tribe. A recognized 
member of another tribe, band, or Rancheria" is a person whose name is listed on the 
membership roll of another tribe, band, or Rancheria recognized by the Secretary of the Interior 
as possessing a government-to-government relationship with the United States. Inherited 
interests in trust allotments shall not disqualify a person from membership.

Section 1 Enrollment Ordinance. The official membership roil of the Mechoopda Indian 
Tribe shall be prepared in accordance with a membership ordinance to be adopted by the 
governing body not later than six months after the approval of this Constitution by the Secretary 
of the Interior or his representative.

(a)  Such ordinance will contain provisions for enrollment procedures, ensuring that the burden 
of proof is on an applicant with respect to any matter that must be proved In order to establish 
eligibility for tribal membership; establishment of an enrollment committee, application forms, 
approval or disapproval of application, standards of proof and evidence, rejection notices, 
hearings, and appeals, procedures for corrections and provisions for keeping the roll on a current 
basis.

(b)  Such ordinance may provide that the Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) records may be 
consulted as evidence of eligibility for membership in the Tribe; provided the Tribe shall retain 
exclusive authority to determine its membership, and that its membership determinations shall 
be conclusive evidence of membership in the Tribe. A certified copy of the official tribal 
membership roll will be sent to the BLA for its records.

Article IV Governing Body

The governing body of the Mechoopda Indian Tribe will be the Tribal Council of the Mechoopda 
Indian Tribe. The Tribal Council shall consist of seven (7) members elected at-large from the 
Mechoopda Indian Tribe. The Tribal Council shall consist of four (4) officers. Chairperson, Vice
Chairperson. Secretary, and Treasurer, and three (3) additional at-large members. Committees 
may be established and appointed by the Tribal Council or elected by the general membership, 
when deemed necessary.

Article V Elections

Section 1. Voter Qualifications. All enrolled members of the Tribe who are eighteen (18) 
years of age or older, regardless of residence, are qualified voters.

Section 2. Qualifications of Candidates. Any member of the Tribe may become a 
candidate for a Tribal Council position or other tribal office if such member meets the following 
qualifications:

(a)  Must be a qualified voter of the Tribe (as defined in Article V, section 1 above), as of the 
date of the election in which he/she intend to run;

(b)  Must not have been convicted of a felony, or a misdemeanor involving dishonesty or moral 
turpitude (including but not limited to fraud, embezzlement, and theft); provided that no person 
shall be ineligible to hold office under this subsection if he/she shall have completed any 
sentence or parole not less than three (3) years prior to the date of the election in which he/she 
intends to run;

(c)  Must not have Intentionally mismanaged any program funded by a State or the federal 
Government, such that the program was de-funded or not re-funded;

(d)  Must not reside in the same household with another member of the council whose term has 
not expired.

Section 3. Elections. AD elections of Tribal Officials will be by secret or absentee ballot. 
An election will not be valid unless at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the eligible qualified 
voters participate in the election. In any election, the candidate receiving the highest number of 
votes cast win be elected to office.

Section 4. First Election. The Tribal Council members in office at the time of approval of 
this Constitution will hold office for the remainder of their terms, and until their successors are 
duly elected and seated. All terms of office will be for two (2) years, except that terms shall be 
staggered. The Chairperson, Secretary and two Member-at-large Council positions will be 
elected in even years and the Vice-Chairperson, Treasurer, and one Member-at-large position 
will be elected in odd years.

Section 5. Nominations. The time, place and manner of nominations will be specified in 
an election ordinance to be adopted pursuant to Section 6 of this Article. . .

Section 6. Section Ordinance. Not later than six (6) months after the approval of this 
Constitution, the Tribal Council will enact an Section Ordinance which will indude, but not be 
limited to, provisions adequate to provide for the following: establishment of an election 
committee; secret balloting; nomination of candidates; absentee balloting; verification of 
signatures on petitions; and a procedure for resolving election disputes. Eections to amend this 
Constitution will be conducted in accordance with Article XVI of this Constitution and 25 CFR 81.

Article VI Removal Recall and Forfeiture

Section 1. Removal. Any member of the Tribal Council found guilty by the Tribal Council of 
behavior involving misconduct reflecting upon the dignity and integrity of the Tribal Council, 
malfeasance in office, or gross neglect of duty shall be removed from office by a majority vote of 
a quorum of the Tribal Council in favor of a removal. The incumbent subject to removal shall be 
given a written statement of the charges against him at least ten (10) days poor to the meeting of 
the Tribal Council at which he is to appear, and he shall be given an opportunity to answer any 
and all charges against him. Voting shall be done by secret ballot The Chairman shall be 
allowed to vote only in the case of a tie. The incumbent shall not be allowed to vote nor to 
preside over the meeting if his position requires him to perform this duty. The incumbent's 
presence at this meeting shall not count toward establishing a quorum of the Tribal Council. 
Should the incumbent subject to removal fail to appear at the Tribal Council meeting or fail to 
provide the Tribal Council with an acceptable reason for not attending this meeting, a quorum of 
the Tribal Council shall proceed to conduct the meeting and the vote for removal as scheduled. 
The decision of the Tribal council shall be final.

Section 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a verified petition from the Section Commrttee signed 
by at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters, the Tribal Council shall provide that the 
matter presented by the petition shall be voted on within sixty (60) days and shall call and 
conduct on an election to determine whether such person shall be recalled from office. The 
recall election shall be conducted pursuant to the election ordinance, and any qualified voter of 
the Tribe may participate in such election.

Section 3. Forfeiture. After due notice, it shall be the duty of the Tribal Council to 
immediately declare vacant any position, and to promptly fill such vacancy in the manner 
provided in Article VII, when it is determined that the incumbent has:

3

(a)  died;
(b)  resigned;
(c)  been convicted while in office of any felony or of a misdemeanor Involving dishonesty or 
moral turpitude;
(d)  been absent, without being excused by the Tribal Council, for three (3) consecutive 
meetings; provided that the loss of office on such grounds shall not serve to prevent a person 
from becoming a candidate for office in subsequent elections.

Article VII Vacancies

Any office which has been vacated, whether it be by removal, recall or forfeiture shall be filled by 
a vote of the general membership at a special election called by the Tribal Counci! within thirty 
(30) days of the vacancy. The election will be held not sooner than ten (10) days after it is called 
nor later than sixty (60) days. If the unexpired term is six (6) months or less, the Tribal Council 
shall fill the vacancy by appointment

Article VIII Powers of the Tribe

Section 1. General Membership: All enrolled members of the Tribe who are eighteen (18) 
years of age or older shall constitute the General Membership.

Section 2. Powers of General Membership: The General Membership shall exercise the 
powers and duties that are specifically set out In this Constitution.

Section 3. Tribal Council: The Tribal Council of the Mechoopda Indian Tribe shall in the 
best interest of the Tribe and its members exercise all inherent and delegated powers and 
responsibilities of an Indian Tribe including but not limited to those powers confirmed under the 
Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, 48 Stat. 984. as amended, subject to any limitations 
imposed upon such powers by the laws of the United States as follows in items (a) through (w);

To promulgate and adopt ordinances, rules and regulations necessary or incidental to the 
(a) 
exercise of any of the powers and duties of the Tribe as long as they do not conflict with this 
Constitution.

To consult, negotiate, contract or conclude agreements with Federal, State, and local 

(b) 
governments or any other person or entity, on activities which may affect the Mechoopda Indian 
Tribe except that agreements to sail or otherwise convey title to any real property of the Tribe 
shall be subject to ratification by the general membership.

To administer ail tribal assets and manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the 

(c) 
Tribe.

(d) 
interest of the Tribe and its members, including the preparation of annual budgets.

To appropriate available tribal funds for public and other lawful purposes, in the best 

(e) 
property including by enactment of such ordinances and regulations as are deemed necessary.

To manage, lease, regulate development upon and otherwise administer all tribal 

To acquire real land, personal property, and or interests therein, on behalf of the Tribe, 

(f) 
to pledge newly acquired lands as security for loans on such lands, and to request the Secretary 
of the Interior to hold land in trust for the Tribe.

(g) 

To accept gifts on behalf of the Tribe.

(h) 

To employ and discharge tribal employees.

(i) 

To employ legal counsel to represent the Tribe.

(j) To initiate on behalf of the Tribe such administrative proceedings or legal action as may 
be necessary to protect the interest of the Tribe and its members.

(k) 

To join or charter tribal housing authorities.
 
 

(I) 

 
 To charter tribal enterprises, corporations, and associations.

(m) 
membership, and adoption of members.

To prescribe rules and regulations governing future membership in the Tribe, loss of 

To enact and enforce such ordinances as are deemed necessary to safeguard and 
(n) 
promote the peace, safety, health and general welfare of the members of the Tribe, including, 
but not limited to laws governing domestic relations of tribal members and the welfare of children 
who are members.

To exercise local police power over lands and people subject to tribal jurisdiction to the 
(o) 
extent necessary to promote the peace, health, safety, and welfare of the Tribe, or its members to 
the extent allowed by Public Law 280.

(p) 

To enforce protection of tribal property and natural resources.

To approve resolutions excluding from the restricted lands of the Tribe any person not 
(q) 
legally entitled to reside or otherwise be present therein, and to enact an exclusion ordinance, if 
deemed necessary, establishing procedures by which such persons may be subject to exclusion.

(r) 

To tax or regulate commerce with the Tribe or within Tribal controlled lands.

(s) 
the credit of the Tribe.

To borrow money for the Tribe and to provide for the repayment thereof, and to pledge 

To waive the sovereign immunity of the Tribe to unconsented lawsuit, provided that no 
(t) 
such waiver of the immunity shall be effective unless the intent to so waive immunity, and the 
extent of which it shall be waived, is clearly stated in writing and approved by a Tribal Council 
Resolution pursuant to a duly called meeting and provided further that general waivers of 
immunity are not favored, and the Council shall make every effort to place restrictions on any 
waiver of immunity that are reasonable under the circumstances.

(u) 
of Tribal government

To adopt rules governing the conduct of Tribal Council meetings and the administration 

(v) 

To encourage and foster the traditions and culture of the Tribe.

(w) 

To make recommendations to Congress on all appropriations.

Section 4. Emergency Powers. Any right or power heretofore vested in the Mechoopda 
Indian Tribe, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution, will not be extinguished by reason 
of its omissions, but may be exercised by the Tribal Council. This section will not be construed to 
prevent the Tribal Council from taking emergency action to protect tribal property, assets, or 
other fundamental interests. Actions required of Council in emergency circumstances will be set 
forth in Tribal ordinances.

Article IX Tribal Enactment

Section 1. Ordinances. All policies and laws Intended to be of general permanent effect 
shall be embodied in ordinances, such as the election ordinance, or the enrollment ordinance. 
Such enactment shall be available for Inspection by any tribal member during normal office 
hours, and copies of newly enacted ordinances shall be posted in any established places for the 
posting of tribal notices furnished to general or legal libraries as appropriate, and published in 
newspapers of genera! circulation within the general area of the Tribe.

Section 2. Resolutions and Motions. All final decisions on matters of limited duration, 
where a formal expression of decision or approval is needed, shall be embodied in resolutions. 
Other decisions of a temporary or one-time nature, or relating to particular individuals, officials or 
committees, shall be in the form of motions, noted in the minutes of the Council, and shall be 
available for inspection by tribal members during normal office hours.

Section 3. Certification. All ordinances and resolutions will be dated and numbered, and 
will include a certification showing the presence of a quorum and the number of members voting 
for, against, or abstaining.

Section 4. Validity. No enactment of the Tribal Council will be of any validity or effect 
unless it is enacted In a duly called meeting with a quorum present

Section 5. Conflict of Interest No Tribal Council members shall participate in the 
discussion or determination of any matter in which he/she has a direct financial interest, or any 
matter directly affecting any person who resides in that Council member's household, or any 
immediate family member. Such member shall withdraw from any such matter, and the minutes 
shall indicate such withdrawal. Any member required to withdraw from a matter pursuant to this 
section shall still be counted present for purposes of establishing a quorum.

Section 6. Approval of Tribal Enactment Any enactment of the Tribe which requires the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his representative, pursuant to this Constitution, shall 
be presented to the appropriate office of the Bureau of Indian Affairs within three (3) working 
days after its enactment, or as promptly thereafter as administratively feasible. The Tribal 
Council shall request acknowledgment of receipt from the BIA within five (5) days of its 
submission.
 
 

ARTICLE X REFERENDUM

 
 Upon receipt of a verified petition from the Election Committee signed by at least thirty 
(30%) percent of the qualified voters, the Tribal Council shall provide that the matter presented 
by the petition shall be voted on within sixty (60) days, by secret ballot, at a regular or special 
election. The Tribal Council shall abide by the vote of a majority of the voters in such election, 
provided that at least thirty (30%) percent of those eligible to vote have voted.

The petition and ballot language shall specifically state the referendum matter to be 

determined.
 
 

ARTICLE XI BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. Records. Tribal members shall have the right to review all Tribal records, 
including financial records, during regular business hours, except for personnel, medical and any 
other records made confidential by tribal ordinance or other applicable law.

Section 2. Civil Rights. The provisions of Title II of the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 
(82 Stat. 77), Public Law 90-284, 25 U.S.C. S 1302, as amended, protecting the civil rights of 
members and other persons under the Tribe's jurisdiction, shall be applicable to the Tribe, its 

officers and agents, and all persons acting on its behalf. In exercising its powers of self
government, the Tribe shall not:

Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion or abridging the 
(a) 
freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people to peaceably assemble and to 
petition for a redress of grievances;

Violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and effects 

(b) 
against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon probable cause, 
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be search and the 
person or thing to be seized;

(c) 

Subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

(d) 

Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;

(e) 

Take any private property for a public use without just compensation;

Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial, to be
(f) 
informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witness against
him, have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and at his own expense have 
the assistance of council for his defense;

Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual punishment, 
(g) 
and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense any penalty or punishment greater 
than imprisonment for a term of one (1) year and a fine of five thousand dollars ($5,000), or 
both;

(h) 
person of liberty or property without due process of law;

Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or deprive any 

(i) 

Pass any bill of attainder or expost facto law; or,

(j) 
request, to a trial by a jury of not less than six (6) persons.

Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the right, upon 
 
 

ARTICLE XII MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Regular and Special Meeting. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be 
held at the Tribal offices, once a month, on a date to be determined by the Tribal Council. The 
Tribal Council meetings may be open or closed sessions. Special meetings of the Tribal Council 
may be called by the chairperson, and shall be called by him/her upon receipt of a petition 
signed by at least four (4) Tribal Council members, and when so called the Tribal Council shall 
have the power to transact business as a regular meeting, provided a quorum is present.

Section 2. Quorum. A quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of a majority, or any four 
(4), of the seven (7) members of the Tribal Council. No business shall be transacted unless a 
quorum is present.

Section 3. General Membership Meetings. Regular meetings of the General Membership 
will be held annually on the second Saturday in July. Special meetings of the General 
membership may be called by the Tribal Council, and shall be called by the Council upon receipt 
and verification of a petition signed by at least twenty-five (25%) percent of the members of the 
General Membership. Notice of such meetings shall be given at least seven (7) days in 
advance by posting and publication. The General Membership shall exercise its powers by 

means of the referendum, petition, voting privileges, initiative, recall and other election 
processes.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII ORDER OF BUSINESS

 
 The order of business and rules of Tribal Council meetings shall be established by ordinance of 
the Tribal Council. The order of business for Tribal Council meetings shall be:
(a) 
(b) 
(c) 
(d) 
(e) 
(f) 
(g) 

Call to order by Chairperson;
Roil call and Ascertainment of a quorum;
Approval of Minutes of previous meeting;
Unfinished business;
Reports;
New business;
Adjournment.

ARTICLE XIV Duties of Officers

Section 1. Installation of Officers. Newly elected Council Members and other elected 
officials shall be installed in office and assume their duties at the first regularly scheduled Tribal 
Council meeting after their election, and shall serve until their terms of duty have expired. In 
installing newly elected council members and other officials, the Tribal Chairperson, or his/her 
designee shall administer the following oath of office to each newly elected Council member or 
other official;

"I_____________________, do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will faithfully and
impartially carry out the duties of my office to the best of my ability and that I will at all times 
promote and protect the best interests of my tribe, in accordance with its constitution and 
policies."

Section 2. Duties. It shall be the duty and obligation of each Council member and other 
officers to serve the interests of the whole Tribe and not the special interest of family members 
or any other group, and no Council member or other officer shall show favoritism in the exercise 
of his/her duties under the Constitution.

Section 3. Chairperson. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Tribal 
Council and General Membership. He/She shall execute on behalf of the Tribe all contracts, 
leases, and other documents approved by the Tribal Council. He/She shall vote only in the case 
of a tie, and shall assume such other responsibilities as designated by the Tribal Council. The 
Chairperson shall be the official representative of and spokesperson for the Tribe when the Tribal 
Council is not in session. He/She shall co-sign all payments and disbursements except the petty 
cash. Another check signer may be appointed by the Tribal Council in Chairperson's absence.

Section 4. Vice-Chairperson. The Vice-Chairperson shall assist the Chairperson when called 
upon to do so. In the absence of the Chairperson, he/she shall preside at meetings and when so 
presiding shall have all rights, privileges, duties, and responsibilities of the Chairperson. He/she 
shall have full voting rights of a Council member except when acting as Chairperson. The Vice
Chairperson shall co-sign all payments and disbursements. Another check signer may be 
appointed by Tribal Council in Vice-Chairperson's absence.

Section 5. Secretary. The Secretary shall cause all minutes of ail meetings to be kept and 
shall attest to enactment of all resolutions and ordinances. The Secretary shall cause to be 
issued all notices of meetings, and election and general correspondence, as directed by Tribal 
Council, and shall cause to be mailed minutes of Tribal Council and General Membership 
meetings, to any tribal members so requesting.

Section 6. Treasurer. The Treasurer shall execute the financial directives of the Tribal Council, 
receive all monies of the Tribe, and keep an accurate account of all receipts and disbursements. 
Funds shall be deposited In the Mechoopda Indian Tribe account in a local bank selected by the 
Tribal Council, where depositors' funds are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance 
Corporation. All disbursements, except petty cash, shall be made by check, requiring the 
signature of the Chairperson and Vice-Chairperson. In the event that the Chairperson or Vice
Chairperson, are unavailable, Council will appoint another member of the Tribal Council to act 
on behalf of the absent authorized signatory. The Treasurer shall file a bond satisfactory to the 
Tribal Council if required by the Tribal Council, and all financial records shall be available for 
inspection by any member of the Mechoopda Indian Tribe through appointment according to 
procedures to be established by the Tribal Council. The Treasurer shall cause to be prepared an 
annual financial statement and submit it to all tribal members.

Section 7. Members-At-Large. The three (3) at-large members of the Tribal Council shall 
perform such duties and exercise such powers as may be delegated to them by the Tribal 
Council.

Section 8. Expiration of Office. At the expiration of each Tribal Council Member's term 
of office, each council person shall be required to turn over all tribal records and papers in 
his/her custody to his/her successor.
 
 

ARTICLE XV SEVERABILITY AND INTERPRETATION

 
 This Constitution shall be interpreted to give effect to every word, and to avoid inconsistencies 
and contradictions, to the maximum extent possible. If any provision of this Constitution is 
dedared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision shall be severed and 
the remaining provisions shall continue in full force to the maximum extent possible. Nothing in 
this Constitution shall be construed as an express or implied waiver of the Tribe's sovereign 
immunity.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI AMENDMENTS AND REVISIONS

 
 Amendments may be proposed by the Tribal Council on its own initiative or upon receipt and 
verification of a petition signed by at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters. The 
proposed amendment must contain the precise language that would become part of the 
Constitution and must also contain any changes to other parts of the Constitution necessarily 
entailed if the amendment Is approved. Amendments to this Constitution may be ratified and 
approved by the Secretary of the interior or his duly authorized representative in the same 
manner as the original Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII ADOPTION AND REVOCATION

 
 This Constitution shall become effective upon approval by the Secretary of the Interior or his 
authorized representative, pursuant to ratification by a majority of the voters of the Tribe in a 
special election to be called by the Secretary of the Interior under the Indian Reorganization Ad, 
provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of the Tribe's qualified voters actually vote in said 
Secretarial election. The Secretary or his representative shall authorize the calling of an election 
to adopt or revoke this Constitution upon request of the Tribal Council. Once this Constitution 
has become effective, it may be amended only in accordance with Article XVI and may be 
revoked only in accordance with the procedures set forth in this Article XVII.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Secretary of the Interior on November 7, 

1997, the attached Constitution of the Mechoopda Indian Tribe was submitted to the

qualified voters of the Tribe on February 1, 1998, was duly adopted/rejected by a vote of 

45 For and 2 Against and 0 Cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated In an election 

in which at least thirty percent of the 73 members qualified to vote, cast their ballot in 
accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 
984), as amended

Chairman, Election Committee

Member, Election Committee

Member, Election Committee

Date: 2-1-98

certificate OF APPROVAL

I, Ronald M. Jaeger Sacramento Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the 
Authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 987), 
as amended, and delegated to the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 230 D.M. 2.4 
and redelegated to me by a Memorandum of Agreement dated August 16, 1994, do hereby 
approve the Constitution of the Mechoopda Indian Tribe. This Constitution is effective as 
of this date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing 
any action under this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Acting

Area Director

FEB 13 1998

Date:

