Article XVII

Within ten days after the adjournment of the General Council, the Secretary 
shall transmit the minutes to the Superintendent, the minutes transmitted to be 
signed by the Chairman and attested by the Secretary.

Article XVIII

All actions of the General Council shall be submitted to the Business Council. 
For the purpose of acting upon the minutes of the General Council, a meeting 
of the Business Council, the Superintendent and the Secretary of the General 
Council shall be held at the Agency Office on the tenth day after the adjourn
ment of the General Council. All actions of the General Council that meet 
with the approval of the Business Council provided for in this article [sic]. 
Any action of the General Council that may be disapproved by the Business 
Council shall be referred back to the General Council for its reconsideration at 
its next meeting.

Walter Swift Bird, 
Jas. Crow Feather, 
John Promise, 
Henry W. Fielder, 
Straight Head (his X mark).

66

Constitution and Bylaws 
of the Menominee Indians 
(Menominee People, 1924)

Up to 1924, the same year Congress enacted the Indian Naturalization 
Act, which unilaterally gave the franchise to all those Indians who 
had not yet received it, the Menominee people had continued to show 
great skill as business entrepreneurs still wedded to communal deci
sion making. That same year the Menominee reorganized their gov
ernment by creating an advisory council of seven enrolled members 
who would play a central role in Menominee governance, though the 
tribe continued to rely on its general council for major decisions.

According to David Beck, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs had 
encouraged the Menominee to create an advisory council to help with 
local governance and to avoid discord, but the commissioner contin
ued to wield extraordinary authority over the Menominee’s decision
making capacity. Note the tone and language of the oath of office each 

newly chosen advisory council delegate had to swear: “I, (name), do 
solemnly swear that I will support and defend the Constitution of the 
United States of America, and faithfully execute the office to which 
I have been elected” (emphasis mine).

Beck, David. The Struggle for Self-determination: History of the Menominee 
Indians since 1854 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2005).

Hosmer, Brian C. American Indians in the Marketplace: Persistence and 
Innovation among the Menominees andMetlakatlans, 18710-1920 (Lawrence: 
University Press of Kansas, 1999).

National Archives. RG 75, Central Classified Files, Keshena, 1907

1939, 054.

Constitution and Bylaws of the Menominee Indians

1.  A Committee of Menominee Indians, to be known as “The Advisory 
Council of the Menominee Indian Reservation,” shall be selected to consist of 
seven enrolled and recognized adult members of the Menominee Tribe.
2.  The method of selection shall be as follows: Three members shall be elected 
by the adult members of the tribe in the manner hereinafter described: Those 
desiring to be candidates shall, not less than ten days before election day, 
file their names in the office of the Superintendent of the Reservation, sup
ported by a petition signed by not less than twenty-five qualified voters of the 
Tribe. The Superintendent shall prepare a ballot containing the names of all 
the nominees so filed. Election shall be held on a day in September to be des
ignated by the Superintendent and properly advertised for not less than thirty 
days prior thereto. An election board shall consist of an Inspector, Clerk and 
Ballot Clerk, to be selected by the bystanders at the time designated for the 
opening of the polls, and who shall immediately thereafter declare the polls 
open. Polls shall be open at 9:00 a.m. and remain open until 5:00 p.m. Each 
voter shall obtain from the ballot clerk an official ballot, which shall bear the 
endorsement of the ballot clerk. The voter shall immediately mark his choice 
of three from the list of candidates, and deliver the ballot to the inspector who 
shall deposit same in the ballot box, and announce to the clerk the name of the 
voter, which shall be written on the polling list by the clerk. In case any voter 
is not able to prepare his ballot, he may call upon any member of the election 
board to assist him. Immediately after the closing of the polls, the ballot box 
shall be opened and the votes counted by the election officers. The ballots and 
tally sheets shall then be delivered to the Superintendent, who, with the two 
judges of the Indian Court of the Menominee Reservation, shall constitute the 
canvassing board. The three candidates receiving the highest number of votes 
shall be declared elected.

Another three members shall be selected by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs from a list of eligibles to be submitted to him by the Superintendent 

of the Reservation. The six members selected as above shall meet at once and 
select a seventh member from the Tribe at large.
3.  The seven members so chosen shall take office on the third Monday in 
October, or as soon thereafter, following their election, as practicable, and shall 
hold office for two years and until their successors are chosen and qualify.

4.  Should any vacancy arise in the Advisory Council by the death, resignation, 
or otherwise, of any of its members, said vacancy shall be filled by the Advisory 
Council, subject to the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
5.  Before entering upon duty, each member of the Advisory Council shall 
subscribe in the presence of the Superintendent of the Reservation the fol
lowing oath: “I, (name), do solemnly swear that I will support and defend the 
Constitution of the United States of America, and faithfully execute the office 
to which I have been elected.”

6.  At the first regular meeting held by the Advisory Council after its election, 
it shall select from its members a president and a secretary. The president’s 
duties shall be to preside at all meetings when present, and the secretary’s duty 
shall be to keep a record of all proceedings, and file a certified copy of the same 
in the office of the Superintendent, within ten days after the meeting. In the 
absence of either of the above officers, the Advisory Council shall elect a presi
dent or secretary pro tem. No business shall be transacted without the presence 
of a quorum, which shall consist of a majority of the members of the Council. 
The minutes of the Council shall be signed by the president and secretary and 
at least two other members of the Council.

7.  The regular meetings of the Council shall begin each year on the third 
Monday in October, or as soon thereafter as practicable after the new Council 
is elected. In case of exigency, the President of the Council may call a spe
cial meeting of the Council, upon a request in writing by the majority of the 
Council members. All meetings are to be held in Keshens or Neopit, in the 
discretion of the Council. The total length of time consumed for all such meet
ings shall not exceed ten days in one year.
8.  The Advisory Council as above constituted shall be the representatives 
of the Menominee Tribe of Indians in all matters affecting the welfare and 
business of the Tribe, including the conduct of the logging and milling opera
tions on the Reservation, and it shall be the duty of the Council to consider 
all matters brought to its attention by the members of the Tribe, or by the 
Superintendent, or that may arise through its own investigations, and shall 
submit to the Superintendent of the Reservation for appropriate action such 
recommendations as it has to make. If the Superintendent fails to take satisfac
tory action, the Council may appeal to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
through the Superintendent of the Reservation, and if the Superintendent of the 
Reservation fails or refuses to submit such appeal, the Council may communi
cate direct with the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
9.  Each member of the Advisory Council shall receive as compensation for 
his services, $5.00 for each day’s attendance at the regular and special meet
ings, and 10 cents per mile for the distance necessarily traveled from his home 

to the meeting place and return; provided, that compensation shall not be paid 
for more than ten days in one year. This compensation shall be paid by check, 
drawn by the Superintendent of the Reservation from tribal funds applicable.
10.  The Advisory Council may recommend to the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs any changes in these regulations that may, at any time in its judgment, 
seem advisable.

/s/ Department of the Interior.
Offi ce of Indian Affairs.
Feb. 25, 1924.
Approved, 
/s/ Chas. H. Burke 
Commissioner.

67

Duwamish Constitution
(Duwamish People, 1925)

The Duwamish were one of several small tribal nations (e.g., 
Suquamish, Snoqualmie, Stilliguamish, Snohomish, Skagit) who, 
under duress, negotiated and signed the Treaty of Point Elliott with 
the United States on January 22, 1855 (12 Stat. 927). In this land
cession treaty, the several tribes relinquished nearly eleven million 
acres of their territory in exchange for various financial and other 
inducements, including recognition of their sovereign status and pro
prietary rights to their much-reduced remaining lands. It would be 
nearly four years before the treaty was finally ratified by the U.S. 
Senate and proclaimed by the president in March 1859.

Historically, the Duwamish lived in several villages along the 
river bearing their name, and their territory encompassed what became 
the city of Seattle, which is named after Chief Seattle, or Sieahl, the 
first signer of the Point Elliott Treaty. Upon ratification of the agree
ment, the Duwamish gradually scattered widely and became deeply 
impoverished as their lands were settled by non-Indians.

The Duwamish struggled to retain their political autonomy, and in 
February 1925 the tribe’s leaders, who had organized the Duwamish 
Tribal Organization, adopted their nation’s first written constitution. 
This document laid out the organization’s purpose, defined member
ship requirements, and identified the officers—president, secretary
treasurer, and business council members—all of whom were to hold 
office indefinitely until they voluntarily resigned or “unless [they

