51

Menominee Constitution
(Menominee People, 1904)

The 1892 constitution was not enacted because of the tension between 
some of the traditional leaders, the Indian agents, and a number of the 
younger Menominee, who demanded a greater role in the tribe’s eco
nomic development. By the early 1900s, the Menominee’s logging 
industry had proved a major success, and another attempt was made— 
this time successfully—to adopt a modern constitution. Similar to the 
1892 iteration, this document contained language that denounced the 
traditional system of hereditary chiefs and instead created a modern 
structure of governance with a fifteen-member business committee 
and a tribal chair.

After the charter was written, the tribe’s membership adopted it 
in a general council session on October 18, 1904. Shepard Freeman, 
the agency superintendent, then certified and approved the new con
stitution on November 21, 1904.

National Archives. RG 75, Central Classified Files, Keshena 1907
1939, 054.

Constitution of the Menominee Tribe of Indians 
of the State of Wisconsin

Whereas, the government of the Menominee tribe of Indians is not orga
nized according to civilized principles, but is an old form of government 
which has existed from the earliest ages, in which the ruling power has been 
under the control of hereditary chiefs, as handed down from generation to 
generation from time immemorial to the present time; and our tribe being 
now far enough advanced in civilization, in an age, when this old system of 
government becomes inefficient for promoting the progress [and] the best 
interests and general welfare of the tribe, therefore:

We, the members of the Menominee tribe of Indians in General Council 
assembled, believing that individual rights and interests as well as a closer 
tribal union and a more compact and substantial form of government will 
best conserve our common rights, privileges and interests, insure our pro
tection and promotion and better secure the blessing of civilization to our
selves and our posterity, do ordain and establish this Constitution for the 
government of our tribe.

Article I

Section 1. The boundary and jurisdiction of the Menominee tribe of Indians shall 
be the present boundary of the lands owned and occupied as a reservation by said 
tribe of Indians subject to such changes as may be made therein from time to 
time through the re-adjustment of their affairs with the United States. Said lands 
shall be divided by imaginary lines into three equal parts or districts, so that each 
district shall, as nearly as may be, include the same number of inhabitants quali
fied to participate in the General Councils or elections of said tribe.

Section 2. All persons whose names rightly appear on the present 
duly authenticated rolls of this tribe and their offspring shall constitute the 
Menominee tribe of Indians and the Business committee hereinafter provided 
for shall have power to determine by resolution who are entitled to have their 
names continued thereon or added to said roll from time to time.

Article II

Section 1. All powers and authority relating to the conduct and settlement of 
all tribal business, and such matters as concern the general welfare of the tribe 
herein granted, shall hereafter be entrusted to the general supervision, direc
tion and management of fifteen members of the tribe, who shall be chosen 
bi-ennially and be known and designated as the “Business Committee” of the 
Menominee tribe of Indians, who shall see that the laws, rules, and regulations 
of the tribe are faithfully executed and no person shall be a member thereof who 
shall not have attained to the age of twenty-five years, and who is not, when 
elected, a member of said tribe and an actual inhabitant of the Menominee res
ervation and does not possess such other qualifications as are herein provided.
Section 2. Each of the three Districts, when bounded and set off as herein
before provided shall be entitled to choose by ballot of a majority of its qualified 
electors, cast at an election duly called for the same day, five members of said 
“Business Committee,” who shall hold their offices for the period of two years, 
and until their successor shall have been chosen and have duly qualified.

Section 3. In election by the tribe in General Council or by districts, only 
male members who shall have attained the age of 21 years shall be entitled 
to vote.

Section 4. The “Business Committee” shall choose their chairman from 
among the members thereof, who shall be known and designated as “Chairman 
of the Business Committee” of said tribe, who shall preside over its delibera
tions, and possess the same rights and privileges as other members thereof, in 
addition to those hereinafter provided.

Section 5. The “Business Committee” shall choose its own subordinate 
officers, and also a chairman pro tempore, in the absence of its chairman. 
They shall also have a common seal, which shall bear the device “Business 
Committee of the Menominee Tribe” which shall remain in the custody of the 
Secretary thereof.

Section 6. The “Business Committee” shall have the sole power of all 

impeachments of its members and all other officers under this constitution.

Section 7. The “Business Committee” shall have the sole power to try all 
impeachments. When sitting for that purpose, they shall be on oath or affirma
tion. When the chairman of the “Business Committee” is tried the chairman pro 
tempore shall preside. No person shall be convicted without the concurrence of 
two-thirds of the members present. Judgments in cases of impeachment shall not 
extend further than to removal from office, but the party convicted shall neverthe
less be liable to indictment, trial, judgment and punishment, according to law.

Section 8. The “Business Committee” shall assemble at least once in every 
year, and such annual meeting shall be held on the third Monday in September 
unless said Committee shall by resolution appoint a different day, giving 15 
days’ general notice of said change.

Section 9. The times, places and manner of holding all elections shall 
be prescribed by said “Business Committee” when elected. The “Business 
Committee” shall be the Judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of 
its own members, and a majority of its members shall constitute a quorum 
to transact business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and 
compel the attendance of absent members, in such manner and under such 
penalties as it may from time to time provide. It may determine the rules of its 
proceedings, punish its members for disorderly behavior, and with the concur
rence of two-thirds of the members thereof, expel a member. It shall keep a 
record of its proceedings and from time to time publish the same, excepting 
parts as may, in their judgment, require secrecy, and the yeas and nays of its 
members on any question shall at the desire of any member present, be entered 
on said record or journal. It may adjourn from time to time, or take such recess 
as a majority of its members may determine.

Section 10. The members of the “Business Committee” shall in all cases 
except felony and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their 
attendance upon its sessions and in going to and returning from the same; and 
for any speech or debate in said Committee, they shall not be questioned in 
any other place.

Section 11. Every act, resolution, order, warrant, or contract which shall 
have received the approval of the “Business Committee” shall, before it 
becomes of force and effect, be presented to the chairman of said “Business 
Committee”; if he approve, he shall sign it; together with the secretary of said 
committee, who shall also certify to its correctness under seal; but if not, he 
shall state his objections to the “Business Committee,” who shall enter the 
objections at large on their journal, and proceed to reconsider it. If, after such 
reconsideration, two-thirds of the members of the “Business Committee” agree 
to pass such act, resolution, order, warrant, or contract, it shall take effect. No 
money belonging to the Menominee tribe shall be drawn from the Treasury of 
the Menominee tribe of Indians, but in consequence of appropriations made 
and warrants duly drawn and issued by said Committee; and a regular state
ment and account of the receipts and expenditures of all tribal moneys shall be 
kept and published from time to time.

Section 12. The “Business Committee” shall have power to make provi
sions for the election or appointment of all its needful officers, including a 
Secretary, Treasurer, Sergeant-at-arms and other officers as may be deemed 

expedient; and shall prescribe their duties except as herein provided and fix the 
rate of their compensation.

Section 13. The members of the “Business Committee” shall receive 
a compensation for their services, to be ascertained by law, and paid out of 
the Treasury of the Menominee tribe of Indians, or out of any funds avail
able, belonging to said tribe in the United States Treasury; and the “Business 
Committee” shall fix the pay and determine the length of service of all other 
officers, agents, attorneys or employees of the Menominee Tribe of Indians.

Section 14. The “Business Committee” shall have power to appoint and 
commission one or more Delegates to represent the tribe at Washington, D.C., 
and attend to such business as the tribe may have before the Departments, in 
the Courts or before the Congress of the United States; and such Delegate or 
Delegates shall receive such compensation for services and expenses as the 
“Business Committee” may deem proper and shall determine.

Section 15. The “Business Committee” shall have power to make provi
sions for raising revenue. To lay and collect taxes and to make all laws which 
shall be necessary and proper for carrying into execution the foregoing pow
ers, and all other powers vested by this constitution in the government of the 
Menominee Tribe of Indians or in any officer thereof.

Section 16. No member of the “Business Committee” shall, during the time 
for which he was elected, be appointed to any other office under the authority of 
the Menominee tribe of Indians which shall have been created, or the emoluments 
whereof shall have been increased, during such time; and no person holding any 
office under the United States shall be a member of the “Business Committee” 
during his continuance in office, after the election in the year 1906.

Section 17. In the event of a vacancy in the offices of Secretary, Treasurer, 
“Business Committee” or any other office under this constitution by reason of 
death, removal, resignation or otherwise, such vacancy shall be at once filled 
by an election or appointment by the members of the “Business Committee” 
and such elected member or officer shall serve out the unexpired term of his 
predecessor, unless sooner removed by death or otherwise.

Article III

Section 1. The chairman of the “Business Committee” shall hold his office at 
a place to be designated by said Committee and shall see that the Menominee 
tribe of Indians and each member thereof are protected in all their rights.

Section 2. He shall make a full report of his official actions and proceedings 
to the “Business Committee” in writing at the beginning of each annual session 
thereof, and may also communicate his views and recommend to said commit
tee, at the commencement of every session the adoption of such measure, as he 
may deem to be for the best interest of the Menominee tribe of Indians.

Section 3. The chairman of the “Business Committee” shall see that all 
moneys and annuities due the Tribe from the United States or from any other 
source are promptly paid over according to agreement.

Section 4. The chairman of the “Business Committee” shall have power to 
call special meetings of the committee, and with the consent of the “Business 

Committee” to employ Counsel to prosecute or defend any suit, claim or 
demand in favor of, or against the Menominee tribe of Indians, and such com
mittee shall make provision for the payment of such counsel or attorney who 
may be so employed.

Section 5. In the absence or inability of the chairman of the “Business 
Committee” to perform his said duties, a chairman pro tempore shall preside 
over the “Business Committee,” when in session who shall also discharge such 
other duties as appertain to that office.

Section 6. The Secretary shall keep and preserve the records of the 
“Business Committee” and assist the chairman in the management of public 
business. He shall keep a record of all official papers and documents of every 
kind issued by the authority of the “Business Committee” and when necessary 
certify, sign and affix the proper seal to the same. He shall perform such other 
official duties as may be enjoined upon him by the “Business Committee” or 
the chairman thereof.

Section 7. The Treasurer shall be custodian of all moneys belonging to 
and paid over to the tribe and shall pay out the same under the direction of the 
“Business Committee” and with the signature of the secretary and chairman 
of the “Business Committee,” but under no other circumstances shall he use, 
pay out or distribute the money of the tribe. Before entering upon the duties 
of his office he shall execute a bond, in such sum and form as the “Business 
Committee” may direct, to be approved by the chairman thereof. He shall pay 
over all balances in his hands to his successor in office so soon as he shall have 
qualified for its duties.

Section 8. Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, members of 
the “Business Committee” and all other officers shall each take and subscribe 
to an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance and execution of the 
trusts reposed in them, which shall be duly filed or kept on record.

Section 9. For inability, neglect of duty or misdemeanor in office the 
chairman of the “Business Committee” or any other officer of the tribe elected 
or appointed, may, upon conviction by committee, be removed from office, 
two-thirds of the members thereof being necessary to convict.

Section 10. Immediately after the adoption of these laws, the Menominee 
people in General Council and Convention assembled, by a majority vote shall 
then and there proceed to elect by ballot a “Business Committee,” who shall 
constitute the first “Business Committee” of said tribe who shall hold their 
offices until their successors shall have been chosen and qualified at a general 
election to be held as herein provided. The members so chosen shall then meet 
in session and elect a Chairman, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and a Sergeant-at- 
arms and other necessary officers, who shall at once take the oath of office, to be 
administered by the chairman, who with the secretary, when chosen, is hereby 
especially authorized and empowered to administer oaths and affirmations.

Section 11. The “Business Committee” and the officers so elected and 
qualified shall immediately enter upon their respective duties, and serve until 
their successors have been duly elected or appointed and shall have qualified.

Section 12. The chairman of the “Business Committee” shall call a special 
session thereof to convene at Keshena, Wisconsin, within seven days after 

these laws shall have been adopted. The said Committee shall be called to 
order and the oath of the office administered by the chairman or secretary to all 
members who have not previously taken the same.

Section 13. The “Business Committee,” for this special session only, may 
remain in session not exceeding twelve days and shall fix the time of holding 
the first general election, and take such other action as may be necessary to put 
the tribal government as herein provided in full operation, under these laws.

Section 14. A the general election to be held on the second Tuesday in 
June a.d. 1906, there shall be elected a “Business Committee” for a full term 
of two years, and in each alternate year thereafter all of the members of the 
“Business Committee” shall be elected to serve for the period of two years as 
hereinbefore provided.

Section 15. This constitution may be altered or amended at any time by a 

two-thirds vote of the “Business Committee.”

The forgoing Constitution was read over both in English and Menominee 
and the provisions thereof were fully explained in council. Upon deliberation 
of all present it was agreed to adopt the foregoing instrument.

On motion, it was unanimously carried that the constitution presented and 

set forth in the records be adopted.

On motion, it was unanimously carried that the following named mem
bers of the tribe namely: Steve Askenit, Peter Lookaround, Reginald Oshkosh, 
Louis Keshena, Moses Corn, John Perote, Paul Kenaboway, Paul Baxter, 
Joseph Okatchecum, Alex Peters, Mitchell Oshkenauaniew, Moses Tucker, 
Wyuskasit, Wehshequanatt and Henry Wolf be elected to constitute the first 
“Business Committee” of the Menominee Tribe of Indians.

Resolved, That copies of these resolutions be sent one to the President of 
the United States, one to the Secretary of the Interior, one to the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs, one to the Superintendent of the Green Bay Indian Agency, 
one to each Congressman of the state of Wisconsin and one to the Indian Rights 
Associations.

On motion, the General Council adjourned sine die.
Done in General Council at Keshena, Wisconsin, by the Menominee Tribe 

of Indians this 18th day of October, a.d. 1904.

In witness whereof we have hereunto subscribed our names.

Thos. La Bell, 
President Pro tem of the General Council.
Mitchell Mahkimetas, Secretary.

I hereby certify that the foregoing resolutions were adopted at a Council 
Meeting of the Menominee Tribe of Indians held at Keshena, Wisconsin, on 
the 18th day of October, 1904, and that to the best of my belief represents the 
wishes of the members of the Menominee Tribe of Indians.

Shepard Freeman,
Sup’t and Sp’l Dis. Agent.
Dated at Keshena, Wisconsin, November 21st, 1904.

