the council: Provided, that either party to such condemnation proceedings may 
appeal from the judgment rendered therein without bond to the superior court 
of the county in which such land lies, but such appeal shall not stay execution, 
and the Judge of the superior court to which such appeal is taken may, in his 
discretion, require either party to give such bond, either before or pending such 
trial, as he may deem fair and reasonable.

Section 29. That the marshal of the band shall execute, serve, and carry 
into effect all orders, process and acts of the council affecting the rights, inter
ests and affairs of the band as a corporation, under such rules and regulations, 
and for such fees and salary, as may be prescribed by the council, but the sher
iff shall execute all papers and serve orders and process of the superior court in 
which any trial may be had.

Section 30.  That all laws and clauses of laws in conflict with this act be 

and the same are hereby repealed.

Section 31. That this act shall be in force from and after its ratification.
Ratified the 8th day of March, a.d. 1897.

44 

Constitution of the Menominee
Tribe of Indians (Menominee 
People, 1892)

The name Menominee derives from an Anishinabe word, “Manomini,” 
meaning “wild rice people.” In the past the Menominee lived near Lake 
Michigan in what is now Wisconsin and were active in the fur trade, 
especially with the French. A series of land-cession treaties with the 
United States significantly reduced their land holdings from almost 
ten million acres to fewer than 250,000 in northern Wisconsin.

As was the case with many native nations, internal tensions 
mounted among the Menominee as they struggled with the crushing 
paternalism of federal forces—especially local Indian agents—intent 
on devastating tribal life at all levels: religious, economic, political, 
and cultural.

Fortunately for the Menominee, their reduced territory still con
tained a vast swath of harvestable timber, and some Menominee saw 
logging as their best chance to gain a measure of economic inde
pendence. The Menominee who pushed for the tribe’s first written 
constitution engaged in what Hosmer has called “purposeful mod
ernization” in an effort to moderate the tension between the rampant 
individualism of non-Indian society (which typically fails to recog
nize the larger society) and the communal values of traditional tribal 

society (which was typically was viewed as inhibiting economic 
development).

By enacting P.L. 153 on June 12, 1890, Congress acknowledged 
the tribe’s right to cut and market its own timber, created a mechanism 
for funding this tribal enterprise—including the per-capita distribution 
of earnings to tribal members—and generally endorsed Indian par
ticipation in logging, something most other lumber-rich Indian tribes 
were denied.

This law was a principal impetus that compelled some Menominee 
tribal leaders, like Mitchell Oshkenaniew and Peter LaMotte, to 
demand a greater degree of self-determination. The 1892 constitution, 
written by Oshkenaniew and LaMotte, focused heavily on the con
struction and implementation of a business council that would have 
guided the tribe’s affairs, had it become law. It was not approved, 
however, because of resistance generated by the local Indian agent 
and certain hereditary chiefs.

Beck, David. The Struggle for Self-determination: History of the Menominee
Indians since 1854 (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2005).

Hosmer, Brian C. American Indians in the Marketplace: Persistence and 
Innovation among the Menominees andMetlakatlans, 1870-1920 (Lawrence: 
University Press of Kansas, 1999).

National Archives. RG 75, Letters Received, 1881-1907, 1892, 31904.

Constitution of the Menomonee Tribe 
of Indians of the State of Wisconsin

Whereas, the government of the Menomonee Tribe of Indians having been 
under the rule or control of hereditary chiefs from time immemorial to the 
present time, and having arrived at a stage in civilization when this old system 
of government becomes an obstacle to the progress, the best interests and gen
eral welfare of the tribe, therefore;

We, the members of the Menomonee tribe of Indians in general council 
assembled, believing that individual rights and interests as well as a closer 
tribal union and a more compact and substantial form of government will best 
conserve our common rights, privileges and interests, insure our protection and 
promotion and better secure the blessings of civilization to ourselves and our 
posterity do ordain and establish this constitution for the government of our 
tribe, the duly constituted authorities of the United States assenting thereto;

Article I

Section 1. The boundary and jurisdiction of the Menomonee tribe of Indians 
shall be the present boundary of the lands owned and occupied as a reservation 

by said tribe of Indians, subject to such changes as may be made therein from 
time to time through the re-adjustment of their affairs with the United States. 
Said lands shall be divided by imaginary lines into three equal parts or districts, 
so that each district shall, as near as may be, include the same number of inhab
itants qualified to participate in the general councils or elections of the tribe.

Section 2. All persons whose names rightly appear on the present duly 
authenticated rolls of this tribe, and their offspring, shall constitute the 
Menomonee tribe of Indians. And the Business Committee hereinafter pro
vided for shall have power to determine by resolution who are entitled to have 
their names continued thereon or added to said roll from time to time, subject 
to approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Article II

Section 1. The conduct and settlement of all tribal business, and such matters 
as concern the general welfare of the tribe, shall hereafter be entrusted to the 
general supervision, direction and management of seven members of the tribe, 
who shall be chosen bi-ennially and be known and designated as the “Business 
Committee” of the Menomonee tribe of Indians, who shall see that the laws, 
rules and regulations of the tribe are faithfully executed, and no person shall be 
a member thereof who shall not have attained to the age of twenty five years, 
and who is not when elected, a member of said tribe and an actual inhabitant 
of the Menomonee reservation and does not possess such other qualifications 
as are herein provided.

Section 2. Each of the three Districts, when bounded and set off as herein
before provided, shall be entitled to choose by ballot of majority of its qualified 
electors, cast at an election duly called for the same day, two members of said 
“Business Committee” who shall hold their offices for the period of two years, 
and until their successors shall have been chosen and duly qualified.

Section 3. There shall also be chosen by a majority of all the qualified 
electors of said tribe, to be voted for in like manner and at the same time and 
for a similar term of service a seventh member of said “Business Committee,” 
who shall be known and designated as “Chairman of the Business Committee” 
of said tribe, who shall preside over its deliberations, and possess the same 
rights and privileges as other members thereof, in addition to those hereinafter 
provided.

Section 4. In election by the tribe in General Council or by Districts, only 
male members who shall have attained the age of twenty-one years shall be 
entitled to vote.

Section 5. The “Business Committee” shall choose its own subordinate 
officers, and also a chairman pro tempore, in the absence of its chairman. 
They shall also have a common seal, which shall bear the device “Business 
Committee of the Menomonee Tribe,” which shall remain in the custody of the 
Secretary thereof.

Section 6. The “Business Committee” shall have the sole power to try all 
impeachments of its members. When sitting for that purpose, they shall be on 
oath of affirmation; and no person shall be convicted without the concurrence 

of two-thirds of the members present, a quorum voting. Judgments in cases 
of impeachments shall not extend further than to removal from office but the 
party convicted shall nevertheless be liable to indictment, trial, judgment, and 
punishment according to law.

Section 7. The “Business Committee” shall assemble at least once in every 
year, and such annual meeting shall be held on the third Monday in September 
unless said Committee shall by resolution appoint a different day, giving 15 
days’ general notice of said change.

Section 8. The times, places and manner of holding all elections shall 
be prescribed by said “Business Committee” when elected. The “Business 
Committee” shall be the Judge of the elections, returns and qualifications of its 
own members, and four of its members shall constitute a quorum to transact 
business, but a smaller number may adjourn from day to day, and compel the 
attendance of absent members, in such manner, and under such penalties as it 
may from time to time provide. It may determine the rules of its proceedings, 
punish its members for disorderly behavior, and with the concurrence of five 
members thereof, expel a member. It shall keep a record of its proceedings 
and the yeas and nays of its members on any question shall, at the desire of a 
member present, be entered on said record or journal. It may adjourn from time 
to time, or take such recess as a majority of its members determine.

Section 9. The members of the “Business Committee” shall in all cases 
except felony and breach of the peace, be privileged from arrest during their 
attendance upon its sessions and in and for any speech or debate in said 
committee, they shall not be questioned in any other place.

Section 10. Every act, resolution, order, warrant, or contract which 
shall have received the approval of the “Business Committee” shall before it 
becomes of force and effect, be presented to the Chairman of said “Business 
Committee” who shall sign it together with the Secretary of said Committee, 
who shall also certify to its correctness under seal. No money belonging to 
Menomonee tribe shall be drawn from the Treasury, but in consequence of 
appropriations made and warrants duly drawn and issued by said Committee; 
and a regular statement and account of the receipts and expenditures of all 
tribal monies shall be kept and published from time to time.

Section 11. The “Business Committee” shall have power to make provision 
for the election or appointment of all its needful officers, including a Secretary 
and Treasurer thereof, as may be deemed expedient; and shall provide their 
duties except as herein provided and fix the rate of their compensation.

Section 12. The members of the “Business Committee” shall receive two 
dollars per day each, for the time they are actually employed, and the “Business 
Committee” shall fix the pay and determine the length of service of all other 
officers, agents, attorneys, or employees of the Menomonee tribe of Indians.

Section 13. The “Business Committee” shall also have power to appoint 
and commission one or more delegates to represent the tribe at Washington, 
D.C., and attend to such business as the Tribe may have before the Departments, 
in the Courts or before the Congress of the United States; and such Delegate 
or Delegates shall receive such compensation for services and expenses as the 
“Business Committee” may deem proper and shall determine.

Section 14. In the event of a vacancy in the offices of Secretary or 
Treasurer, or in the “Business Committee” by reason of death, removal, res
ignation or other wise such vacancy shall be at once filled by an election by 
the members of the “Business Committee” and such elected member or officer 
shall serve out the unexpired term of his predecessor, unless sooner removed 
by death or otherwise.

Article III

Section 1. The Chairman of the “Business Committee” shall hold his office at 
a place to be designated by said Committee and shall see that the Menomonee 
tribe and each member thereof are protected in all their rights.

Section 2. He shall make a full report of his official actions and proceed
ings to the “Business Committee” in writing at the beginning of each annual 
session thereof, and may also communicate his views and recommend to said 
Committee at the commencement of every session the adoption of such mea
sure, as he may deem to be for the best interests of the Menomonee tribe of 
Indians.

Section 3. The Chairman of the “Business Committee” shall see that all 
monies and annuities due the Nation from the United States or from any other 
source are promptly paid over according to agreement.

Section 4. In the absence or inability of the Chairman of the “Business 
Committee” to perform his said duties, a chairman pro tempore shall preside 
over the “Business Committee” when in session, who shall also discharge such 
other duties as appertain to that office.

Section 5. The Secretary shall keep and preserve the records of the 
“Business Committee” and assist the Chairman in the management of public 
business. He shall keep a record of all official papers and documents of every 
kind issued by the authority of the “Business Committee” and when necessary 
certify, sign, and affix the proper seal to the same. He shall perform such other 
official duties as may be enjoined upon him by the “Business Committee” or 
the Chairman thereof.

Section 6. The Treasurer shall be custodian of all moneys belonging to 
and paid over to the tribe and shall pay out the same under the direction of the 
“Business Committee” and with the signature of the Secretary and Chairman 
of the “Business Committee,” but under no other circumstances shall he use, 
pay out or distribute the money of the Tribe. Before entering upon the duties 
of his office he shall execute a bond, in such sum and form as the “Business 
Committee” may direct, to be approved by the Chairman thereof. He shall pay 
over all balances in his hands to his successor in office so soon as he shall have 
qualified for its duties.

Section 7. Before entering upon the discharge of their duties, members of 
the “Business Committee” and all other officers, shall each take and subscribe 
to an oath or affirmation for the faithful performance and execution of the 
trusts reposed in them, which shall be duly filed or kept on record.

Section 8. For inability, neglect of duty or misdemeanor in office the 
Chairman of the “Business Committee” or any other officer of the tribe elected 

or appointed, may, upon conviction by the Committee be removed from office, 
five of the members thereof being necessary to convict.

Section 9. Immediately after the adoption of these laws the Menomonee 
people in General Council and Convention assembled, by a majority vote, 
shall then and there proceed to elect by ballot, a Chairman of the “Business 
Committee” and six other members thereof, who shall constitute the first 
“Business Committee” of said tribe, who shall hold their offices until their 
successors shall have been chosen at a general election to be held as herein pro
vided. The members so chosen shall then meet in session and elect a Secretary, 
a Treasurer, and a Sergeant-at-Arms and other necessary officers, who shall 
at once take the oath of office, to be administered by the Chairman, who with 
the Secretary, when chosen, is hereby especially authorized and empowered to 
administer oaths and affirmations.

Section 10. The “Business Committee” and the officers so elected and 
qualified shall immediately enter upon their respective duties, and serve until 
their successors have been duly elected or appointed and shall have qualified.
Section 11. The Chairman of the “Business Committee” shall call a spe
cial session thereof to convene at Keshena, Wisconsin, within thirty days after 
these laws shall have been adopted. The said Committee shall be called to 
order and the oath of the office administered by the Chairman or Secretary to 
all members who have not previously taken the same.

Section 12. The “Business Committee” for this special session only, may 
remain in session not exceeding ten days and shall fix the time of holding the 
first general election, and take such other action as may be necessary to put the 
tribal government as herein provided in full operation under these laws.

Section 13. At the first general election to be held on the third Monday in 
August 1893, there shall be elected a chairman and six other members of the 
“Business Committee” for a full term of two years, and in each alternate year 
thereafter all of the members of the “Business Committee” shall be elected to 
serve for the period of two years as hereinbefore provided.

Section 14. These laws may be altered or amended at any time by a two- 
thirds vote of the “Business Committee” with the approval of the Chairman 
thereof.

Done in General Council at Keshena, Wisconsin, by the Menomonee 

Tribe of Indians, this 27th day of August 1889.

Mitchell Oshkenaniew

Peter Lamotte....

