HeinOnline

Citation:
George Emory Fay, Compiler %26 Editor. Charters,
Constitutions and By-Laws of the Indian Tribes of North
America (1967-1981 All Published).
Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

Content downloaded/printed from HeinOnline

Thu Jun 28 13:48:10 2018

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance 

of HeinOnline's Terms and Conditions of the license 
agreement available at https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from 

uncorrected OCR text.

Use QR Code reader to send PDF to 
your smartphone or tablet device
 
 

ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF THE MESA GRANDE BAND

OF MISSION INDIANS, CALIFORNIA

 
 Approved February 3, 1971
Amended April 16, 1972

WHEREAS, there is not an approved organizational document for the Mesa Grande 

Band of Mission Indians, and

WHEREAS, there is a need for rules of procedure to govern the operations of the 

Mesa Grande Band, and

WHEREAS, it is desired formally to recognize the existing governing body,

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Mesa Grande Band in general council assem

bled that:

ARTICLE I  — TERRITORY

SECTION 1. The Mesa Grande Band of Mission Indians, hereinafter referred to as 
the Band, shall be governed by the Mesa Grande General Council, hereinafter referred 
to as the General Council which, subject to the provisions herein, shall have juris
diction over the lands within the boundaries of the reservation set aside for the 
Mesa Grande Band and over any lands which may hereafter be added thereto.

ARTICLE II  — MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1. The membership of the Band shall consist of those persons who file 
applications for membership and are found qualified under one of the following cate
gories:

(a)  Persons whose names appear on the 1940 Census Roll of the Mesa Grande 

Band, except where ”NE” on Column 1 opposite the names of certain per
sons, such persons shall not be eligible for membership.

(b)  Persons of one-eighth (1/8) or more degree of Mesa Grande Diegueno In
dian blood who are lineal descendants of individuals who were living 
on or before 1890.

(c)  Persons of one-eighth (1/8) or more degree of Indian blood who are li

neal descendants of individuals eligible for membership under (1) 
above, regardless of whether the ancestor through whom eligibility is 
claimed is living or dead.

(d)  Persons who have been adopted by the Band in accordance with an adoption 

approved by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized represen
tative.

SEC. 2. If a person who is eligible for membership has been allotted on another 
reservation or on a public domain allotment or is officially enrolled or is a recog

nized member of some other tribe or band, such person or his descendants shall not be 
enrolled. A "recognized member of some other tribe or band" is a person who, because 
of his affiliation with the other tribe or band, holds tribal office, has received 
benefits or has shared in the assets of the tribe or band.

SEC. 3. The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with an or

dinance adopted by the members of the Band and approved by the Secretary of the In
terior or his duly authorized representative. Such ordinance shall contain provis
ions for enrollment procedures, enrollment committee, application form, approval or 
disapproval of application, rejection notice, appeals and provisions for keeping the 
roll on a current basis.

ARTICLE III — GOVERNING BODY

SECTION 1. The governing body of the Band shall be the general council which 
shall consist of all adult members twenty-one (21) years of age or older. In addition, 
there shall be elected from the General Council a Business Committee consisting of a 
Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, and three (3) committeemen who shall be elected by secret 
ballot and who, except as specified in Article IV shall serve for a term of two (2) 
years. The Business Committee shall select from within or from without the member
ship of the Band a Secretary-Treasurer, who shall not vote as a member of the Busi
ness Committee. [Amendment Approved: April 6, 1972, changing twenty-one (21) years 
to eighteen (18) years.]

SEC. 2. Three (3) members of the Business Committee shall constitute a quorum.

ARTICLE IV — ELECTIONS

SECTION 1. Any enrolled member of the Band, twenty-one (21) years of age or old

er, shall have the right to vote and, if duly elected, to hold office. All election 
of officers shall be by secret ballot. Nominations for the Business Committee shall 
be made at a General Council meeting called for that purpose, and all nominees certi
fied by the existing Business Committee shall have their names placed on the ballot. 
Within thirty (30) days after the approval of this document by the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs, an election shall be called to elect the members of the Business Com
mittee. The three members receiving the highest number of votes in the election shall 
hold office for a period of three (3) years and the two (2) remaining members shall 
hold office for a period of two (2) years. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be 
for two (2) years and elections shall be held each year on the second (2nd) Sunday of 
December. Members shall hold office until their successors are elected, qualified 
and installed. All nominations and elections whether for officers or by way of re
ferendum, shall be conducted in accordance with an ordinance or ordinances adopted by 
the governing body which shall provide for the dates thereof, for polling places, 
election committees and their duties, absentee balloting and other necessary require
ments. [Amendment Approved: April 6, 1972, changing twenty-one (21) years to eight
een (13) years.]

ARTICLE V — GRIEVANCE BOARD

SECTION 1. The Band shall elect a Grievance Board consisting of three (3) members 

who are not on the Business Committee. Board members shall serve for two (2) years. 
They shall be elected on the date established for the election of members of the Busi
ness Committee.

SEC. 2. The Grievance Board shall consider written complaints alleging miscon
duct or other improper acts of any member of the Business Committee and if the facts 
warrant, shall request the Chairman of the Business Committee to call a special meet
ing of the Band to act upon such written complaints, after giving the accused at 
least ten (10) days* notice and a copy of the charges. In the event the Chairman 
refuses or fails to call such a meeting, the Grievance Board shall call a special 
meeting of the Band for the purpose of hearing and acting upon such complaints. The 
Band shall have the power by majority vote of those present, after giving the accus
ed a hearing of the charges, or if the charges are sustained, to remove him from of
fice and proceed to elect a successor.

ARTICLE VI — VACANCIES AND RECALL

SECTION 1. If a member of the Business Committee fails or refuses to attend two 

(2) regular meetings in succession unless owing to illness or other causes for which 
he cannot be held responsible or he is excused by the Chairman or, if a member of 
the Business Committee shall be convicted of a felony, his office shall be forfeit
ed automatically and a special election to select his replacement shall be called by 
the Chairman of the Business Committee. Elections shall be in accordance as stated 
in Article IV.

SEC. 2. In the event any council member has been impeached from office, he shall 

not be eligible for office for a period of three (3) years.

ARTICLE VII — POWERS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

SECTION 1. General Council.—The General Council shall have the power and respon

sibilities hereinafter provided, subject to any limitation imposed by the statutes 
or the Constitution of the United States.

(a)  To manage, lease, contract or otherwise deal with tribal assets and com

munity resources.

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be 

subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his author
ized representatives.

(c)  To enact ordinances, consistent with these Articles of Association gov

erning future membership, loss of membership and the adoption of mem
bers.

(d)  To assess fees for the payment of expenses of the Band or to finance any 

project which in its opinion is for the benefit of the Band as a whole.

(e)  To take such actions as are necessary to carry into effect any of the 

foregoing powers.

(f)  To establish its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its affairs 

and by appropriate ordinance or resolution delegate to the Business 
Committee or any other committee any of the foregoing powers and duties.

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the General Council, but not expressly 

referred to in this article, shall not be lost by reason of their omission, but may 

be exercised through the adoption of appropriate bylaws, amendments, ordinances or 
resolutions.

SEC. 2. Business Committee.—The Business Committee shall have the following ad

ministrative powers and duties, but shall not commit the land to any contract lease, 
or other arrangement unless it is so empowered by a duly enacted ordinance or resolu
tion of the General Council:

(a) Cause the effectuation of all ordinances, resolutions or other enactments 

of the General Council.

(b) Represent the Band in all negotiations between the Band and local, state 

and federal government, their agencies and officers.

(c)  Faithfully advise the General Council of all aforementioned negotiations.

ARTICLE VIII — DUTIES OF OFFICERS

SECTION 1. Chairman.—It shall be the duty of the Chairman to preside at all 
meetings of the General Council and Business Committee and to perform all the duties 
of his office.

SEC. 2. Vice-C hairman.—In the absence of Chairman, he shall have the power and 

authority of the Chairman and may, if authorized by the Chairman, assist the Chair
man in the performance of his duties.

SEC. 3. Secretary-Treasurer.—The Secretary-Treasurer shall conduct all corres

pondence and keep a complete and accurate record of all matters transacted at the 
General Council meetings and meetings of the Business Committee. He shall certify 
the enactment of all ordinances or resolutions of both the Business Committee and 
the General Council. He shall attend to the giving of all notices required by this 
document. He shall also receive on behalf of the Business Committee all petitions 
provided for in this document. He shall be bonded at the expense of the Band and 
shall have care and custody of all valuables for the Band and deposit all money in 
an approved depository. He shall disburse all funds as ordered by the General Coun
cil or Business Committee when authorized to expend such funds.

He shall maintain financial accounts, receipts, and records which shall be avail

able for inspection by members of the General Council and Business Committee. All 
financial records of the Band shall be audited at least once each year and such oth
er times as may be directed by the General Council. Copies of all minutes, resolu
tions, or other enactments shall be submitted to the Bureau of Indian Affairs through 
the Riverside Area Field Office as soon after their enactment as possible.

ARTICLE IX — MEETINGS

SECTION 1. Regular meetings of the General Council shall be held on the second 

(2nd) Sunday of every month.

SEC. 2. Regular meetings of the Business Committee shall be called by the Chair

man.

SEC. 3. Special meetings of the General Council may be called by the Chairman 

at his discretion and shall be called by him when requested by a majority of the 
Business Committee.

SEC. 4. All meetings of the Band and the Business Committee shall be conducted 

in accordance with Robert’s Rules of Order.

SEC. 5. A meeting of the General Council shall not be valid unless there shall 
be at least 15 voting members present and no business shall be conducted in the ab
sence of a quorum.

SEC. 6. Three members of the Business Committee shall constitute a quorum, and 

no business shall be conducted in the absence of a quorum.

ARTICLE X  — APPROVAL

These Articles of Association shall be in effect after they receive the approval 
of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the present Business Committee shall with
in thirty (30) days after his approval cause an election of officers to be held in 
accordance with the terms of these Articles of Association.

ARTICLE XI — AMENDMENTS

These Articles of Association may be amended by a majority vote of the General 
Council at a meeting duly called for that purpose and such amendments shall be in 
effect upon the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 We, the undersigned, duly elected members of the Mesa Grande Business Committee, 

do hereby certify that the foregoing Articles of Association were duly adopted by 
the members of the Mesa Grande Band by a vote of 21 "for” and 1 "against” and 

0 "abstaining", at a duly called general meeting on April 12, 1970.
 
  
  
  
 

CLAUDE DEVERS,
 
 Spokesman 
 
JESSIE BERESFORD
 
 Sec.-Treas.

JULIA KEJO.

Committee Member 
 

CHARLES PONCHETTI


Committee Member 

MANUEL LaCHAPPA

Committee Member.

The Amendments contained in Article, Section 1, and Article
IV of this document were authorized by resolution of the Mesa 
Grande Band on January 9, 1972, and approved by the Sacramen
to Area Director on April 6, 1972.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 The foregoing Articles of Association of the Mesa Grande Band of Mission Indians 

adopted at a general council of the members of the band held on April 12, 1970, is 
approved with the understanding that in the first election of officers the three 
candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall serve for a term of three 
years and the two candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall serve 
for a term of two years; that the last sentence in Article IV shall not have appli
cation to the first election of officers held under this Articles of Association; 
that the word "impeached" appearing in Article VI, Section B, shall be construed as 
meaning "removed"; that the Grievance Board referred to in Article V shall have the 
power to remove an officer only after the charges filed against him are sustained 
at the subsequent hearing, and that Title II of the Act of April 11, 1968 (82 Stat. 
73), guaranteeing the civil rights of individuals shall be applicable to the Mesa 
Grande Band of Mission Indians and to each individual member thereof.

Date: February 3, 1971

LOUIS R. BRICE 
Commissioner
 
 

AMENDMENT
ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION 
OF THE
MESA GRANDE BAND OF MISSION INDIANS

 
 AMENDMENT NO. 1.

Article VI, VACANCIES AND RECALL, shall be amended by adding a new 
subsection, C, as follows:

C. The General Council shall call a special election to 

select a replacement to fill the unexpired term of any 
tribal official who has resigned or died. Said election 
to be in accordance with Article VI of the Articles of 
Association.
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I,  _____________________________ Secretary of

(Sgd) Richard R. Hite 

Deputy Assistant 

the Interior of the United States of America, do hereby approve the 

attached Amendment No. 1 to the Articles of Association of the Mesa

Grande Band of Mission Indians, adopted by a vote of 16 for and

0 against, with 0 abstaining, at a general meeting of 

the members of the band held on June 11, 1972, which amendment shall 

become Part C of Article VI, Vacancies and Recall.

(sgd) Richard R. Hite

Assistant Secretary of the Interior

Date: JAN 1 2 1973

Washington, D. C.

