 
  
 ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF THE  
 

MESA GRANDE BAND OF MISSION INDIANS, CALIFORNIA

 
 WHEREAS, there is not an approved organizational document for the Mesa 

Grande Band of Mission Indians, and

WHEREAS, there is a need for rules of procedure to govern the operations of 

the Mesa Grande Band, and

WHEREAS, it is desired formally to recognize the existing governing body, 

NOW, THEREFORE, BE IT RESOLVED by the Mesa Grande Band in general council 

assembled that:

ARTICLE I. TERRITORY

The Mesa Grande Band of Mission Indians, hereinafter referred to as the 

Band, shall be governed by the Mesa Grande General Council, hereinafter referred 

to as the General Council which, subject to the provisions herein, shall have 

jurisdiction over the lands within the boundaries of the reservation set aside 

for the Mesa Grande Band and over any lands which may hereafter be added thereto. 

ARTICLE II. MEMBERSHIP

A. The membership of the Band shall consist of those persons who file 

applications for membership and are found qualified under one of the following 

categories:

1. Persons whose names appear on the 1940 Census Roll of the

Mesa Grande Band, excent where "NE” on Column 1 opposite the names 

of certain persons, such persons shall not be eligible for 

membership.

2. Persons of one-eighth (1/8) or more degree of Mesa Grande Diegueno

Indian blood who are lineal descendants of individuals who were 

living on or before 1890.
 
 

 
 
 3. Persons of one-eighth (1/8) or more degree of Indian blood who 

are lineal descendants of individuals eligible for membership 

under (1) above, regardless of whether the ancestor through whom 

eligibility is claimed is living or dead.

4. Persons who have been adopted by the Band in accordance with an 

adoption ordinance approved by the Secretary of the Interior or 

his authorized representative.

B. 

If a person who is eligible for membership has been allotted on another 

reservation or on a public domain allotment or is officially enrolled or is a 

recognized member of some other tribe or band, such person or his descendants shall 

not be enrolled. A "recognized member of some other tribe or band" is a person 

who, because of his affiliation with the other tribe or band, holds tribal office, 

has received benefits or has shared in the assets of the tribe or band.

C.  The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with an 

ordinance adopted by the members of the Band and approved by the Secretary of 

the Interior or his duly authorized representative. Such ordinance shall contain 

provisions for enrollment procedures, enrollment committee, application form, 

approval or disapproval of application, rejection notice, appeals and provisions 

for keeping the roll on a current basis, 

ARTICLE III. GOVERNING BODY

A.  The governing body of the Band shall be the general council which shall 

consist of all adult members twenty-one (21) years of age or older. In addi

tion, there shall be elected from the General Council a Business Committee con

sisting of a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, and three (3) committeemen who shall be 

elected by secret ballot and who. except as specified in Article IV shall serve 

for a term of two (2) years. The Business Committee shall select from within 

or from without the membership of the Band a Secretary-Treasurer, who shall not

vote as a member of the Business Committee.

B. Three (3) members of Che Business Committee shall constitute a quorum. 

ARTICLE IV. ELECTIONS

Any enrolled member of the Band, twenty-one (21) years of age or older, 

shall have the right to vote and, if duly elected, to hold office. All election 

of officers shall be by secret ballot. Nominations for the Business Committee 

shall be made at a General Council meeting called for that purpose, and all 

nominees certified by the existing Business Committee shall have their names 

placed on the ballot. Within thirty (30) days after the approval of this 

document by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, an election shall be called to 

elect the members of the Business Committee. The three members receiving the 

highest number of votes in the election shall hold office for a period of three 

(3) years and the two (2) remaining members shall hold office for a period of 

two (2) years. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for two (2) years and 

elections shall be held each year on the second (2nd) Sunday of December. 

Members shall hold office until their successors are elected, qualified and 

installed. All nominations and elections whether for officers or by way of 

referendum, shall be conducted in accordance with an ordinance or ordinances 

adopted by the governing body which shall provide for the dates thereof, for 

polling places, election committees and their duties, absentee balloting and 

other necessary requirements.

ARTICLE V. GRIEVANCE BOARD

A, The Band shall elect a Grievance Board consisting of three (3) members

who are not on the Business Committee, Board members shall serve for two (2) 

years. They shall be elected on the date established for the election of 

members of the Business Committee.
 
 

 
 
 B.  The Grievance Board shall consider written complaints alleging mis

conduct or other improper acts of any member of the Business Committee and if 

the facts warrant, shall request the Chairman of the Business Committee to call 

a special meeting of the Band to act upon such written complaints, after giving 

the accused at least ten (10) days’ notice and a copy of the charges. In the 

event the Chairman refuses or fails to call such a meeting, the Grievance Board 

shall call a special meeting of the Band for the purpose of hearing and acting 

upon such complaints. The Band shall have the power by majority vote of those 

present, after giving the accused a hearing of the charges, or if the charges 

are sustained, to remove him from office and proceed to elect a successor. 

ARTICLE VI. VACANCIES AND RECALL

A. 

If a member of the Business Committee fails or refuses to attend 

two (2) regular meetings in succession unless owing to illness or other causes 

for which he cannot be held responsible or he is excused by the Chairman or, 

if a member of the Business Committee shall be convicted of a felony, his office 

shall be forfeited automatically and a special election to select his replace

ment shall be called by the Chairman of the Business Committee. Elections shall 

be in accordance as stated in Article IV.

B. 

In the event any council member has been impeached from office, he 

shall not be eligible for office for a period of three (3) years. 

ARTICLE VII. POWERS OF THE GENERAL COUNCIL

A.  General Council; The General Council shall have the power and responsi

bilities hereinafter provided, subject to any limitation imposed by the statutes 

or the Constitution of the United States.

1. 

To manage, lease, contract or otherwise deal with tribal 

assets and community resources.

2. To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 

Interior or his authorized representative,

3.  To enact ordinances, consistent with these Articles of 

:

Association governing future membership, loss of membership 

and the adoption of members.

4.  To assess fees for the payment of expenses of the Band or

to finance any project which in its opinion is for the benefit

of the Band as a whole.

5.  To take such actions as are necessary to carry into effect 

any of the foregoing powers.

6.  To establish its own rules of procedure for the conduct of 

its affairs and by appropriate ordinance or resolution delegate 

to the Business Committee or any other committee any of the 

foregoing powers and duties.

Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the General Council, but not 

expressly referred to in this article, shall not be lost by reason of their 

omission, but may be exercised through the adoption of appropriate bylaws, 

amendments, ordinances or resolutions. 

B.  Business Committee: The Business Committee shall have the following 

administrative powers and duties, but shall not commit the land to any contract 

lease, or other arrangement unless it is so empowered by a duly enacted ordinance 

or resolution of the General Council:

1. Cause the effectuation of all ordinances, resolutions or 

other enactments of the General Council.
 
 

 
 
 
 2. Represent the Band in all negotiations between the Band and

local, state and federal government, their agencies and officers.

3. Faithfully advise the General Council of all aforementioned 

negotiations.

ARTICLE VIII. DUTIES OF OFFICERS

A. Chairman

It shall be the duty of the Chairman to preside at all meetings of the 

General Council and Business Committee and to perform all the duties 

of his office.

B Vice-Chairman

In the absence or Chairman, he shall have the power and authority of 

the Chairman and may, if authorized by the Chairman, assist the 

Chairman in the performance of his duties.

C. Secretary-Treasurer

The Secretary-Treasurer shall conduct all correspondence and keep a 

complete and accurate record of all matters transacted at the General 

Council meetings and meetings of the Business Committee. He shall 

certify the enactment of all ordinances or resolutions of both the 

Business Committee and the General Council. He shall attend to the 

giving of all notices required by Chis document. He shall also 

receive on behalf of the Business Committee all petitions provided 

for in this document. He shall be bonded at the expense of the Band 

and shall have care and custody of all valuables for the Band and 

deposit all money in an approved depository. We shall disburse all 

funds as ordered by the General Council or Business Committee when 

authorized to expend such funds.
 
 

 
 
 
 He shall maintain financial accounts, receipts, and records which shall 

be available for inspection by members of the General Council and 

Business Committee, All financial records of the Band shall be audited 

at least once each year and such other times as may be directed by the 

General Council, Copies of all minutes, resolutions, or other enact

ments shall be submitted to the Bureau of Indian Affairs through the 

Riverside Area Field Office as soon after their enactment as possible. 
 
 

ARTICLE IX MEETINGS

 
 A.  Regular meetings of the General Council shall be held on the second 

(2) Sunday of every month.

B.  Regular meetings of the Business Committee shall be called by the 

Chairman.

C.  Special meetings of the General Council may be called by the Chairman 

at his discretion and shall be called by him when requested by a majority of 

the Business Committee.

 D. All meetings of the Band and the Business Committee shall be conducted 

in accordance with Robert's Rules of Order.

E.  A meeting of the "eneral Council shall not be valid unless there shall 

be at least 15 voting members present and no business shall be conducted La 

the absence of a quorum.

F.  Three members of the Business Committee shall constitute a quorum, 

and no business shall be conducted in the absence of a quorum, 

ARTICLE X. APPROVAL

These Articles of Association shall be in effect after they receive the 

approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the present Business

Committee shall within thirty (30) days after his approval cause an election of 

officers to be held in accordance with the terms of these Articles of

Association

ARTICLE XI. AMENDMENTS

These Articles of Association may be amended by a majority vote of the

General Council at a meeting duly called for that purpose and such amendments 

shall be in effect upon the approval cf the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 We, the undersigned, duly elected members of the Mesa Grande Business

Committee, do hereby certify that the foregoing Articles of Association were

duly adopted by the members of the Mesa Grande Band by a vote of 21 "for" 

and 1 "against" and 0 "abstaining”, at a duly called general meeting 

on April 12, 1970.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 The foregoing Articles of Association of the Mesa Grande Band of 

Mission Indians adopted at a general council of the members of the 

band held on April 12, 1970, is approved with the understanding that 

in the first election of officers the three candidates receiving the 

highest number of votes shall serve for a term of three years and 

the two candidates receiving the next highest number of votes shall 

serve for a term of two years; that the last sentence in Article IV 

shall not have application to the first election of officers held 

under this Articles of Association; that the word "impeached" 

appearing in Article VI, Section B, shall be construed as meaning 

"removed"; that the Grievance Board referred to in Article V shall 

have the power to remove an officer only after the charges filed 

against him are sustained at the subsequent hearing, and that Title II 

of the Act of April 11, 1968 (82 Stat. 73), guaranteeing the civil 

rights of individuals shall be applicable to the Mesa Grande Band 

of Mission Indians and to each individual member thereof. 

. 

(Sgd) Louis R. Bruce

Commissioner

Date: 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 