 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 
APACHE TRIBE OF
THE MESCALERO RESERVATION

NEW MEXICO


 
  
  
 APPROVED MARCH 25, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON: 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE APACHE TRIBE 
OF THE MESCALERO RESERVATION OF NEW 
MEXICO

PREAMBLE


We, the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation in New 
Mexico, in order to secure to ourselves and our posterity the political 
and civil rights guaranteed to us by treaties and by the statutes 
of the United States; to secure educational advantages; to encourage 
good citizenship; to build up an independent and self-directing 
community life; to encourage and promote all movements and 
efforts leading to the general welfare of our tribe; and acknowledg
ing Almighty God as the source of all power, do ordain and establish 
this constitution.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the tribal business committee and the courts 
of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation shall extend to all 
of the territory included within the present boundaries of the 
reservation, and to such other lands as have been or may hereafter 
be added thereto under any law of the United States, except as 
otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero 
Reservation shall consist of all persons enrolled on the 1935 census 
of the tribe, all children of resident members, and all children of 
nonresident members who have resided on the reservation for 5 
years.

Sec. 2. The tribal business committee shall have power to pass 
ordinances, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering the adoption of new members, except that no person shall 
be adopted into the tribe who has not resided upon the reservation 
for a probationary period to be fixed by resolution of the committee.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the reservation shall be known 
as the Mescalero tribal business committee and shall consist of 10 
members elected at large for the reservation until representatives 
shall be appointed by the tribal business committee among the fol
lowing communities: Tularosa Canyon, Whitetail, Elk-Silver, Car
rizo, and Three Rivers.

Sec. 2. The Mescalero tribal business committee shall have power 
by ordinance to change and establish the boundaries of communities

and to determine their ratio of representation as the shifting of 
population may warrant from time to time.

Sec. 3. The members of the Mescalero tribal business committee 

shall be qualified voters of the reservation 25 years of age or over.

Sec. 4. Immediately after the first election of officers under this 
constitution, the newly elected tribal business committee shall meet 
and organize by electing from their own members a president and 
a vice-president, and from within or without their own membership, 
a secretary and a treasurer.

Sec. 5. As soon as the Mescalero tribal business committee shall 
organize after the first election, it shall determine, by lot, five of its 
members to serve until the first annual election and five to serve until 
the second annual election. Thereafter their successors shall be 
elected to serve for 2 years.

Article IV—Nominations and Elections

Section 1. The first election of a tribal business committee shall 
be held within 30 days after the adoption and approval of this 
constitution, and shall be called and supervised by the present tribal 
business committee in cooperation with the superintendent of the 
reservation.

Sec. 2. The tribal business committee, or an election board ap
pointed by that committee, shall provide rules governing elections 
and shall designate polling places and election officials.

Sec. 3. Enrolled members of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero 
Reservation who are 21 years of age or over, and who have resided 
on the reservation at least 1 year prior to the election, shall have the 
right to vote.

Sec. 4. Elections shall be held annually in December on a day 
selected by the tribal business committee at least 30 days before 
the election.

Sec. 5. Any qualified person may become a candidate for the 
Mescalero tribal business committee by presenting his name to the 
secretary of that committee, or by having it presented on a petition 
signed by five qualified voters of the reservation, at least 15 days 
before the election in either case. The secretary shall post the names 
of all candidates in one or more public places at least 10 days before 
the election.

Sec. 6. If a vacancy occurs in the Mescalero tribal business com
mittee, it shall be filled by the committee until the next annual elec
tion.

Article V—Powers

Section 1. The Mescalero tribal business committee shall have the 
following powers, subject to popular referendum as herein provided:
(a)  To regulate its own procedures; to appoint subordinate boards, 
tribal officials and employees not otherwise provided for in this con
stitution, and to prescribe their salaries, tenure, and duties; to charter 
subordinate organizations for economic purposes, and to regulate 
such organizations by ordinances, provided that any ordinance affect
ing organizations borrowing money from the Federal Government 
shall be subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  To represent the tribe and to act in all matters that concern 
the welfare of the tribe, and to make decisions not inconsistent with 
or contrary to this constitution or the Constitution and Statutes of 
the United States.

(c)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, or local Governments, 
and to advise and consult with representatives of the Interior De
partment on all activities that may affect the reservation, and in 
regard to all appropriation estimates and Federal projects for the 
benefit of the tribe before such estimates or projects are submitted 
to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(d)  To veto the sale, disposition, lease, or incumbrance of tribal 
lands, interest in lands, or other tribal assets, that may be authorized 
by any agency of government without the consent of the tribe; and 
any sale, grant, or lease of any portion of the reservation, or the 
grant of any rights to the use of lands or other assets, or the grant 
or relinquishment of any water or mineral rights or other natural 
or fiscal assets of the Mescalero Reservation, are hereby reserved to 
the sanction of the tribe.

(e)  To regulate the uses and disposition of tribal property and 
funds; to protect and preserve the wild life and natural resources 
of the tribe; to cultivate Indian arts, crafts, and culture; to admin
ister charity; and to promulgate ordinances covering the leasing of 
tribal lands and assignments made upon tribal lands, all action of 
the tribal business committee with respect to such lands to be in 
conformity with departmental regulations for the protection of 
Indian range and timber resources.

(f) To administer any funds or property within the exclusive 
control of the tribe, and to make expenditures from available funds 
for public purposes of the tribe, including salaries and remuneration 
of officers and other employees.

(g) To provide by ordinance, subject to approval by the Secretary 
of the Interior, for the removal or exclusion from the reservation 
of any non-member whose presence may be injurious to members of 
the tribe.

(h)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the tribe and its members, choice of counsel and 
fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(i)  To promulgate ordinances covering law enforcement on the 
reservation and to set up courts for the trial and punishment of 
offenders against such ordinances in cases which do not come within 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the Federal courts; and to promulgate 
ordinances and adopt rules, regulations, and codes for the regulation 
of domestic relations of members of the tribe, and governing mar
riage, divorce, legitimacy, adoption, the care of dependents, the pun
ishment of offenses against the marriage relationship; and to issue 
marriage licenses and decrees of divorce. Any ordinances, rules, or 
regulations covering the matters enumerated in this paragraph shall 
be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, and are 
to be administered by the tribal business committee through a tribal 
or reservation court, except such matters as may be left to the State 
or Federal laws and courts.

(j) 

To regulate the inheritance of property.

(k)  To exercise such further powers as may be delegated to the 
Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation by any authorized Gov
ernment official or agency.

Sec. 2. The foregoing enumeration of powers shall not be con
strued to limit the powers of the Apache Tribe, but all powers of 
local government not expressly intrusted to the Mescalero tribal busi
ness committee by this constitution shall be reserved to the people 
and may be exercised through the adoption of appropriate bylaws 
or constitutional amendments.

Sec. 3. Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this con
stitution is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall 
be presented to the superintendent of the reservation who shall, within 
10 days thereafter, approve or disapprove the same. If the super
intendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall there
upon become effective, but the superintendent shall transmit a copy 
of the same, bearing his indorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may within 90 days from the date of enactment, rescind the 
said ordinance or resolution for any cause by notifying the tribal 
business committee of his veto.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within 10 days after its enactment he 
shall advise the tribal business committee of his reasons therefor. If 
these reasons appear to the committee insufficient, it may, by a ma
jority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may within 90 days from the date of its enactment, 
approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolu
tion shall become effective.

Article VI—Referendum

Upon a petition signed by at least 25 percent of the qualified 
voters of each community, demanding a referendum on any pro
posed or enacted ordinance or resolution, the tribal business commit
tee shall call an election at which a majority of those voting shall 
approve or disapprove the ordinance or resolution in question.

Article VII—Lands

The general control of the reservation lands and other tribal prop
erty shall continue as heretofore, until changed in any particular by 
ordinance. The tribal business committee shall have power to assign 
unused lands or to reassign any unused assignments which have been 
idle for 2 or more years. No reassignment of land may be made 
so long as the original assignee or his heirs shall reside on the land 
unless he shall voluntarily release the land to the tribe.

The tribal business committee shall decide by ordinance what shall 
constitute an economic unit for assignment and shall determine the 
rules of inheritance of such assignments.

Article VIII—Amendments

Amendments to this constitution may be proposed by a majority 
vote of the tribal business committee and may be ratified and approved 
in the same manner as this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE APACHE TRIBE OF THE MESCALERO RESERVATION 
OF NEW MEXICO

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The president of the Mescalero tribal business commit
tee shall preside at all meetings of the committee and direct its offi
cers. He shall appoint, subject to the approval of the committee, 
such boards, committees, and other officers as the business of the tribe 
may require. In the absence of the president, the vice-president shall 
preside and shall have all the duties, responsibilities, and privileges 
of the president.

Sec. 2. The secretary shall keep the minutes of all regular and 
special meetings of the tribal business committee, conduct the neces
sary correspondence, and shall file a copy of the minutes in the office 
of the superintendent at the conclusion of each meeting. A copy shall 
also be sent, through the superintendent, to the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs as soon as possible after each meeting. The committee 
may request the services of the superintendent’s secretary in connec
tion with all meetings and in the keeping of records.

Sec. 3. The treasurer shall accept, receipt for, keep, and safeguard 
all funds in the custody of the committee, whether they be tribal 
funds or special funds for which the committee is acting as trustee 
or custodian. He shall deposit all such funds in a bank or elsewhere 
as directed by the committee and shall make and keep a faithful 
record of such funds and shall report on all receipts and expendi
tures and the amounts and nature of all funds in his possession or 
custody to the committee at regular meetings and at such other times 
as requested by the committee, his reports to be in writing and mat
ters of record. He shall not expend or otherwise use any funds in 
the possession of the committee except when he is authorized to do so 
by the committee. All checks shall be signed by the treasurer and 
countersigned by the president, and all checks issued prior to July 1, 
1940, shall be approved by the superintendent of the reservation. The 
books and records of the treasurer shall be audited at least once a 
year by a competent auditor employed by the committee, and at such 
other times as the committee or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
shall direct. The treasurer shall furnish a surety bond satisfactory 
to the committee and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Article II—Meetings of the Committee

Section 1. The regular meetings of the tribal business committee 
shall be held at Mescalero, New Mexico, on the second Saturday in 
January, March, May, July, September, and November. Special 
meetings may be called by the president or by any three committeemen 
who shall notify all committee members at least 24 hours before the 
time of convening such meeting, unless a majority of the committee 
approve a shorter call in an emergency.

Sec. 2. Seven members shall constitute a legal quorum of the com

mittee.

Sec. 3. No member of the tribal business committee shall vote on 
any matter in which he is financially interested apart from the inter
ests of the tribe.

Sec. 4. At the first meeting of the tribal business committee, it shall 
establish by resolution a regular order of business similar to that used 
by the present tribal business committee.

Article III—Adoption

This constitution and bylaws, when ratified by a majority of the 
qualified voters of the Apache Tribe of the Mescalero Reservation, 
voting at a special election called for the purpose by the Secretary of 
the Interior, at which at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and if 
approved by him, shall be effective from the date of approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved February 4, 1936, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached constitution and bylaws was sub
mitted for ratification to the Indians of the Apache Tribe of the 
Mescalero Reservation and was on February 29, 1936, duly approved 
by a vote of 165 for, and 89 against, in an election in which over 30 
percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with 
section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Marion Simms, 

Chairman of Election Board.

Asa Daklugie, 

Secretary of Election Board.

E. R. McCray,

Superintendent in charge the Mescalero Reservation.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached constitution and bylaws of the Apache Tribe of the 
Mescalero Reservation.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and bylaws.

Approval recommended March 19, 1936.

John Collier, 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., March 25, 1936. 

[seal]

Harold L. Ickes, 

Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

 
 
 