 
 UNITED STATES  
 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

MIAMI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED OCTOBER 10, 1939 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1940 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE MIAMI TRIBE 
OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the Miami Indians of Oklahoma, in order to take advantage of 
the opportunities of economic independence and social advancement 
offered by the Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 
26, 1936, (49 Stat. 1967), do adopt the following Constitution and 
By-laws pursuant to that Act.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Miami Tribe of 

Oklahoma.

Article II—Membership of Tribe

Section 1. The membership of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma shall 

consist of the following persons:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

census roll of the Tribe as of January 1, 1938.

(b)  All children born since the date of the said roll, both of whose 

parents are members of the Tribe.

(c)  Any child born of a marriage between a member of the Miami 
Tribe and a member of any other Indian tribe who chooses to affiliate 
with the Miami Tribe.

(d)  Any child born of a marriage between a member of the Miami 
Tribe and any other person, if such child is admitted to membership 
by the Council of the Miami Tribe.

Sec. 2. The Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regula
tions, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, covering 
future membership including adoptions and the loss of membership.

Article III—Membership of Council

The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be the Miami 
Council. The membership of the Miami Council shall be all the Miami 
Indians residing in Oklahoma; Males, 21 years of age; and females, 21 
years of age.

Article IV—Officers

The officers of the Tribe shall be the Chief, Second Chief, Secretary
Treasurer, and two councilmen, who shall be elected at an open Council 
meeting by a majority vote of the membership present.

Article V—Committees

Section 1. There shall be a Business Committee which shall consist 
of the officers and councilmen as provided in Article IV. The Business

Committee shall have power to appoint subordinate committees 
and representatives, to transact business and otherwise speak or act on 
behalf of the Tribe in all matters on which the Tribe is empowered to 
act. The powers of the Tribe shall be set forth in detail m the cor
porate charter which may be requested by the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Grievance Committee.—This Committee shall consist of 
three members who shall be elected by the membership of the Council 
and shall not include any members of the Business Committee. The 
term of office shall be for three years.

Article VI—Elections

Section 1. Regular elections of officers shall be held by the Council 
on the first Tuesday of September 1939, and each third year thereafter.
Sec. 2. The term of office shall be for three years or until their suc
cessors are elected and installed, provided that the present officers shall 
serve until the first regular election.

Sec. 3. Nominations shall be made from the floor. Election shall 
be by standing vote or by written ballot, a majority vote being neces
sary to elect. Where there are more than two candidates and no one 
receives a majority vote the low candidate shall be eliminated and vot
ing proceed until one candidate receives a majority of votes cast. The 
newly elected officers shall be installed immediately upon their election.

Article VII—Vacancies

Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled at any regular or special 

meeting of the Miami Council.

Article VIII—Removal of Officers

The Grievance Committee shall investigate complaints of miscon
duct or other acts of the members of the Business Committee and upon 
a proper showing shall call a special meeting of the Miami Council 
to act upon such complaints. Such Council shall have power, by a 
majority vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him from 
office and proceed to elect a successor.

Article IX—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and the attached By-laws may be 
proposed by a majority vote of the Business Committee or by a petition 
signed by 30 per cent of the adult members of the Tribe, and if 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior shall be submitted to a refer
endum vote of the members of the Tribe, and shall lie effective if 
approved by a majority vote of those voting in the election
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE MIAMI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chief.—It shall be duty of the Chief to preside at all 
meetings and perform all duties appertaining to the office, also to act as 
chairman of the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Second Chief.—In the absence of the Chief, or during pro
cedure to remove him. the Second Chief shall perform the duties of 

that officer. In case of vacancy, the Second Chief shall succeed at once 
to the office of the Chief until the next special or regular election for 
the office of Chief.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer.—The Secretary-Treasurer shall cor
rectly record the proceedings of all meetings. He shall make out the 
order of the business for the Chief, shall notify all committees of their 
appointments, shall have custody of the records and all papers of the 
Council, which records and papers shall be open to inspection at any 
time, in his presence, by any member of the Council desiring to read 
them. He shall keep a correct list of all members of the Council, shall 
authenticate all accounts or orders of the Council and, in the absence 
of the Chief and Second Chief, shall call the meeting to order until a 
chairman pro tem is selected. He shall render a written report at the 
annual meeting and at the expiration of his term of office records and 
all papers in his possession shall be turned over to his successor. He 
shall issue notices of all meetings and conduct all general correspond
ence, as directed by the Council or the Business Committee. He shall 
receive all moneys of the Council and keep an accurate account of 
receipts and disbursements.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep all tribal moneys entrusted to 
his care in a special account and all disbursements therefrom should be 
made by check. At any time that such account shall amount to more 
than $50.00, he shall file a bond satisfactory to the Business Committee 
and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond shall 
be paid out of tribal moneys.

Article II—Qualifications of Officers

Any person elected to membership in the Business Committee shall 
be not less than 25 years of age, a member of the Miami Tribe of Okla
homa and a resident of Oklahoma. Any member of the Business Com
mittee removing from such territory shall automatically lose his office.

Article III—Meetings

Section 1. Annual meetings of the Council shall be held on the first 
Tuesday of September for the purpose of receiving reports and trans
acting any other business which may come regularly before the 
Council.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Council may be called at the discre
tion of the Chief, and shall be called by him upon the written request 
of the majority of the Business Committee or upon the written request 
of ten members of the Tribe; Provided, That at least ten days’ notice 
shall be given in each instance.

Sec. 3. The principal object of the special meeting must be stated 
in the call for same and may include the words “and for the transaction 
of other business that may be presented.” Unless these words are 
added, no other business can be transacted except for the object stated 
in the call.

Sec. 4. Unless otherwise provided by resolution, the regular meet
ings of the Business Committee shall be held the second Tuesday in 
each month.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
by the Chief at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon the 
written request of three members of the Business Committee.

Sec. 6. Unless some other point under the Quapaw Agency Juris
diction is designated in the call or notice, all meetings of the Council 
and of the Business Committee shall be held at the Quapaw Indian 
Agency.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Three members of the Business Committee shall consti

tute a quorum at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Twenty-five members of the Miami Council shall constitute 

a quorum to transact regular business.

Article V—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the 
qualified voters of the Miami Tribe voting at an election called by the 
Secretary of the Interior under regulations which he may prescribe 
pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 
1936: Provided, That at least 30 per cent of the eligible voters vote in 
such election.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma.

Oscar L. Chapman.

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., August 16, 1939.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved August 16, 1939 by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Miami Indian Tribe 
of Oklahoma and was on October 10, 1939 duly accepted by a vote of 
55 for, and one against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant to section 3 of the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).
The Miami Tribal Business Committee.

By Harley T. Palmer, Chief.
Marie Lucas Downing,

H. A. Andrews,

Superintendent, Quapaw Agency.

By J. A. Phifer,

Deputy Disbursing Agent.

Secretary and Treasurer.
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
MIAMI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT I

 
 Article III of the constitution, Membership of Council, shall be 
amended to read as follows:

The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be the Miami Council.
The membership of the Miami Council shall be all the Miami Indians; 
males, 21 years of age; and females, 21 years of age.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, John A. Carver, Jr., Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the Act of 
June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the foregoing Amend
ment I to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended:

(sgd) John O. Crow
Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs

(sgd) John A. Carver, Jr. 
Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.
Date: June 12, 1964 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved June 12, 1964, by the Assistant
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment I to the Constitu
tion and Bylaws of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, was submitted for 
ratification to the adult members of the Miami Tribe, and on September 1, 
1964, was duly ratified by a vote of 79 for, and 5 against, in an 
election called for that purpose in accordance with Section 3 of the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

(sgd) Forest D. Olds 
Chief, Miami Business Council

(sgd) Virgil N. Harrington
Area Director, Muskogee Area Office
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
MIAMI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT II

 
 Article II of the bylaws, Qualifications of Officers, shall be amended 
to read as follows:

Any person elected to membership in the Business Committee shall 
be not less than 25 years of age, a member of the Miami Tribe of 
Oklahoma, and shall reside within a 50-mile radius of Oklahoma. 
Any member of the Business Committee removing from such territory 
shall automatically lose his office.
 
 

 APPROVAL

 
 I, John A. Carver, Jr., Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
foregoing Amendment II to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Miami 
Tribe of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended:

(Sgd) John O. Crow
Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs

(Sgd) John A. Carver, Jr. 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C. 
June 12, 1964 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved June 12, 1964, by the Assistant Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached Amendment II, to the Constitution and 
Bylaws of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, was submitted for ratification 
to the adult members of the Miami Tribe, and on September 1, 1964, was 
duly ratified by a vote of 71 for, and 13 against, in an election called 
for that purpose in accordance with Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian 
Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

(Sgd) Forest D. Olds
Chief, Miami Business Committee

(Sgd) Virgil N. Harrington
Area Director, Muskogee Area Office
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

 
 of the 
 
MIAMI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT III

 
 Article III of the bylaws, Meetings, shall be amended as follows: 
Section 1 is amended to read as stated below, and Section 4 is to be 
removed and the subsequent Sections renumbered:

Section 1. Annual meetings of the Council shall be held on the 
first Saturday after Labor Day in September for the purpose of 
receiving reports and transacting any other business which may 
come regularly before the Council.
 
 

APPROVAL 

 
 .

I, John A. Carver, Jr., Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the foregoing 
Amendment III to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended:

(sgd) John O. Crow

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs

(sgd) John A. Carver, Jr. 
Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.
Date: June 12, 1964 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved June 12, 1964, by the Assistant Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached Amendment III to the Constitution and 
Bylaws of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, was submitted for ratification 
to the adult members of the Miami Tribe, and on September 1, 1964, was 
duly ratified by a vote of 84 for, and 0 against, in an election 
called for that purpose in accordance with Section 3 of the Oklahoma 
Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

(sgd) Forest D. Olds
Chief, Miami Business Committee

(sgd) Virgil N. Harrington
Area Director, Muskogee Area Office
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

 
 of the 
 

MIAMI TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT IV

 
 Article II of the constitution. Membership of Tribe, shall be 
amended by adding a Section 3, which shall read as follows:

Sec. 3. No member of another tribe shall be eligible for 
membership in the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma; provided, however, 
the foregoing disqualification does not apply to persons who 
acquired membership in the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma before the 
effective date of this Section.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, John A. Carver, Jr., Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
foregoing Amendment IV to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Miami 
Tribe of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended:

(Sgd) James E. Officer
Associate Commissioner of Indian Affairs

(Sgd) John A. Carver, Jr. 
Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.
August 31, 1964 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved August 17 and 31, 1964, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment IV to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Miami Tribe of Oklahoma, was submitted for ratification 
to the adult members of the Miami Tribe, and on September 1, 1964, was 
duly ratified by a vote of 64 for, and 20 against, in an election called 
for that purpose in accordance with Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian 
Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

(Sgd) Virgil N. Harrington
Area Director, Muskogee Area Office

(Sgd) Forest D. Olds 

Chief, Miami Tribe

