 
  
 CONSTITUTION OF THE MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS 
 

OF FLORIDA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida, in 
order to establish an organization, promote the general welfare, 
conserve and develop our lands and resources and secure for our
selves and our descendants the blessing of liberty and freedom do 
ordain and establish this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The authority of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians shall extend to 
the Reservation set aside for their use and occupancy and such 
other lands as may be added thereto by appropriate State or 
Federal laws.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section l. For the six-month period after the ratification and 
approval of this constitution and bylaws, the membership of the 
Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida shall consist of:

(a) All adults or children of one-half degree or more 

Miccosukee Indian blood who apply for membership in the 
tribe.

(b) All children of one-half degree or more Miccosukee 
Indian blood born to members of the tribe who shall auto
matically become members.

(c) All adults or children of less than one-half degree of 

Miccosukee Indian blood who apply for membership in the 
tribe, when such application is approved by the Miccosukee 
General Council.

Sec. 2. Six months from the date of approval of this constitution 
and bylaws, the Miccosukee General Council shall adopt an ordinance, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his 
authorized representative, governing future membership, loss of 
membership, and the adoption of members by the Miccosukee Tribe 
of Indians of Florida.
 
 

 
ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. The authority of the Miccosuk.ee Tribe of Indians shall 
be vested in the Miccasukee General Council. The Miccosukee 
General Council shall be composed of all adult members 18 years 

of age or over. Twenty-five members shall constitute a quorum, 
provided at least three  clans are represented, and no business 
shall be conducted unless a quorum is present at all times.

Sec. 2. The officers of the Miccosukee General Council shall 
consist of a Chairman, Assistant Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer 
and Lawmaker. The officers shall hold office for a term of three
years. Officers shall be elected and Seated, except in the first 
election, during the month of November. In the first election of 
officers after the ratification and approval of this constitution
and bylaws, the officers shall hold office from the date of their 
election until the new election in November, 1964. All officers 
will hold office until their successors are elected and seated.

Sec. 3 The elected officers, in addition to serving the Miccosukee 
Genera1 Council, shall be the Miccosukee Business Council when the 
General Council is not in session. The officers will perform the 
duties in both the General Council and in the Business Council as 
indicated in this constitution and in the bylaws.

Sec. 4. The Miccosukee General Council shall be authorized to 
remove from office any officer of the tribe who fails or refuses 
to attend regular meetings of the General Council or the Business 
Council, unless excused due to illness or for other reasons for 
which he cannot be held responsible. Other grounds for removal 
from office shall include the following: Conviction of a felony 
while in office; failure to perform the duties assigned him; or 
who shall be found guilty of misconduct in the affairs of the 
tribe. Any officer so charged shall have the right to present 
his personal defense to the General Council and the ruling of the 
General Council shall be final. Any vacant position caused by the 
removal of an officer by the Miccosukee General Council, resignation 
or death, may be filled by the Miccosukee General Council for the 
remainder of the unexpired term of such office.

Sec. 5. Any enrolled member of the Miccosukee Tribe, twenty-three 
years of age or over shall be qualified to seek and hold office as an 
officer of the tribe. No member who has been convicted of a felony 
within three years preceding the date of the election, or who is

or has been found guilty
Affairs, 
employed by the Bureau of Indian

by the Miccosukee General Council of misconduct in Indian affairs 
shall be qualified to seek office as an officer of the tribe.
Except for the first election of officers, no person who has been 
a member of the tribe for less than one year immediately preceding 
the election may be eligible to hold office. The Miccosukee General 
Council shall be the sole judge of the qualifications of the officers 
of the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - POWERS OF THE MICCOSUKEE GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. In addition to the powers vested by law in the 
Miccosukee Tribe the General Council shall have the following 
powers subject to any limitations imposed by the Constitution of 
the United States or State or Federal laws applicable to Indians.

Sec. 2. The Miccosukee General Council reserves unto itself the 
authority to approve an annual budget. This budget shall include 
all normal operation expenses and any special projects or expendi
tures contemplated by the tribe. The Business Council shall have 
authority to approve modifications of the budget up to and includ
ing an aggregate of twenty-five percent in any budget year.

Sec. 3. To. levy and collect assessments and to impose fees, 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, upon members 
and non-members doing business within the reservation.

Sec. 4. To enact ordinances to cause to be removed from the 
reservation persons not Legally entitled to reside thereon and 
whose presence may be injurious to the peace, happiness or welfare 
of the members of the tribe, subject to the review of the Secretary 
of the Interior, or his duly authorized representative.

Sec. 5. The Miccosukee General Council is hereby authorized to 
recognize any district committees, associations or other organiza
tion open to the members of the tribe and to approve such organization, 
subject, however, to the provision that no such committee, association 
or organization may assume authorities specifically granted to the 
tribe by this constitution unless by a proper delegation of authority 
by the Miccosukee General Council.

Sec. 6. All rights and powers not delegated to the Miccosukee 
General Council or to the Miccosukee Business Council in this 
constitution and bylaws are reserved to the tribe and may be 
exercised by the members of the tribe through the adoption of 
amendments to this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE MICCOSUKEE BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Miccosukee Business Council shall exercise the 
following powers by appropriate motion, resolution or ordinance 
subject to the limitations imposed by this constitution and bylaws 
and to applicable Federal and State laws.

Sec. 2. To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets, with
out the consent of the tribe, unless prevented by the terms under 
which such lands were acquired.

Sec. 3. To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, so long as such approval is required by Federal law.

Sec. 4. To consult, negotiate, contract, and conclude agreements 
on behalf of the tribe with Federal, State and local governments 
on all matters within the powers of the governing body authorized 
and included in this constitution and bylaws.

Sec. 5. To advise the Secretary of the Interior on all, appropriation 
estimates on Federal projects for the benefit of the tribe.

Sec. 6. As authorized by law, to manage, lease, permit, or other
wise deal with tribal lands, interest in lands or other tribal 
assets; and to purchase or otherwise acquire lands or interests 
in lands within or without the reservation, provided tribal lands 
shall not be sold.

Sec. 7. To engage in any business that will further the economic 
well-being of the members of the tribe, or undertake any programs 
or projects designed for the economic advancement of the people.

Sec. 8. To make and perform contracts and agreements of every 
 description, not inconsistent with law or the provisions of this 
constitution and bylaws, provided that any contract in excess of 
$3,000.00 shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, or his authorized representative.

Sec. 9. To borrow money from the Federal Government, or other 

sources, and to direct the use of such funds for productive purposes, 
or to loan money thus borrowed to members of the tribe, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized repre
sentative. To pledge or assign chattel or future income due or 
to become due, provided such agreement, pledge, assignment, or 
extension thereof shall be subject to the approval of the Secre
tary of the Interior, or his authorized representative.

Sec. 10. To prepare an annual budget for submission to the 
Miccosukee General Council and upon approval of this budget to 
administer any funds within the control of the tribe; to make 
expenditures from available funds for tribal purposes, including 
salaries and expenses to tribal officials or employees. All 
expenditures of tribal funds under control of the Business Council 
shall be authorized in legal session and the amounts so expended 
shall be a matter of public record.

Sec. 11 The Business Council shall cause to be Installed, 
maintained, and audited a complete and detailed accounting system 
and such safe-guards as bonding officials and employees responsible 
for the safety, accuracy and maintenance of such records and funds. 
All checks, drafts or other order for the payment of tribal money, 
notes or other indebtedness issued in the name of the tribe shall 
be signed by such officers, or agents, as provided for in this 
constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Miccosukee Tribe shall be accorded 
equal political rights and equal opportunities to participate in 
the economic resources and activities of the tribe, and no person 
shall be denied freedom of conscience, speech, association or 
assembly, or due process of law, or the right to petition for 
the redress of grievances. The members of the tribe shall continue 
undisturbed in their religious beliefs and nothing in this constitu
tion and bylaws will authorize either the General Council or the 
Business Council to interfere with these traditional religious 
practices according to their custom.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - TRIBAL ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Within thirty days from the date of the approval of 
this constitution and bylaws the Constitutional Committee shall 
convene a General Council for the purpose of electing the five 
officers of the General Council. The General Council shall 
determine its own procedures for nomination of candidates and 
the voting for candidates at that meeting.

Sec. 2. All succeeding elections of officers shall, be conducted 
in accordance with an election ordinance to be adopted by the 
General Council which shall provide for secret ballot elections, 
absentee ballots, prescribe the duties of the election board, 
procedure for casting resident and non-resident ballots, method 
of challenging the right to vote, settlement of election disputes 
and any further requirements for the conduct of the election.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - REVIEW OF RESOLUTIONS AND ORDINANCES

 
 Section 1. Any resolution or ordinance subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative, 
shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Reservation or 
the officer In charge, who shall within ten (10) days thereafter 
approve or disapprove the same.

Sec. 2. Upon approval within ten (10) days the resolution or 

ordinance shall become effective. The Superintendent or officer 
in charge shall transmit copies of all effective resolutions or 
ordinances to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within 
ninety (90) days after receipt thereof, rescind any resolution 
or ordinance for good cause by giving written notice and the 
reasons therefor to the appropriate council.

Sec. 3. If the Superintendent or officer in charge shall 
disapprove any resolution or ordinance, he shall notify the 
appropriate council in writing of his reasons therefor within 
ten (10) days after the resolution is delivered to the office 
of the Superintendent or officer in charge. If the council 
is not satisfied with the reasons so given, it may, by a majority 
of the members voting, refer the resolution or ordinance to the 
Secretary of the Interior for approval.

Sec. 4. The Secretary of the Interior shall within ninety (90) 
days after receipt of any resolution or ordinance referred to him 
by the General Council or the Business Council for approval notify 
the appropriate council in writing of his decision to approve or 
disapprove.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the tribe voting at an 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least thirty percent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election, but no amendment shall become 
effective until it shall, have been approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the 
Interior to call an election on any proposed amendment at the 
request of the Miccosukee General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE X - ADOPTION

 
 Section 1. This constitution and bylaws, when adopted, by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Miccosukee Tribe of 
Indians of Florida voting at an election called for that purpose 
by the Secretary of the Interior, provided at least thirty (30) 

percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, 
shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and, if 
approved, shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS OF FLORIDA

ARTICLE I - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. There shall be four regularly scheduled meetings of 
the Miccosukee General Council to be held during the months of 
November, February, June and August. All meetings shall be on
the first Sunday in each of the above-mentioned months. Notices
shall be posted for these meetings at least three days in advance 
of the meeting, giving the time, date and place of such meeting. 
Special meetings of the Miccosukee General Council may be called 
by a majority vote of the Miccosukee Business Council. Special 
meetings shall be noticed and posted at least three days in advance 
giving time, date and place of such meeting.

Sec. 2. Meetings of the Miccosukee Business Council shall be 
held on the second Sunday in each month. Special meetings of the
Miccosukee Business Council may be called by the Chairman.

Sec. 3. A quorum of the General Council shall be convened when 
twenty-five eligible adult members are present, provided at least 
three clans are represented, and no business shall be conducted 
in the absence of a quorum. All decisions shall be by majority 
vote.

Sec. 4. A quorum of the Miccosukee Business Council shall 
constitute three members provided at least three clans are

of a quorum. All decisions shall be by majority vote.

and no business shall be conducted in the absence 
represented 

Sec. 5. Both the Miccosukee General Council and the Miccosukee
Business Council are authorized to regulate its own procedures,
to appoint subordinate committees, commissions, boards, advisory 
or otherwise, tribal officials and employees not otherwise pro
vided for in this constitution and bylaws.

Sec. 6. No authorities contained in this constitution and 
bylaws may be delegated by the Miccosukee General Council or 
Miccosukee Business Council to tribal officials, district 
councils, or associations to carry out any function for which 
the tribe assumes primary responsibility, except by ordinance 
or resolution duly enacted by the governing bodies in legal 
session, and excepting also those specific requirements contained 
in this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE II - DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chairman

(a) He shall preside at all regular and special meetings of 

the Miccosukee General Council and the Miccosukee Business 
Council.

(b) He shall have general and active management of the business 
activities of the tribe except that he shall not act on matters 
binding the tribe until either the General Council or the 
Business Council has deliberated and enacted appropriate 
resolution.

(c)  He shall see that all resolutions and ordinances of both 
the General Council and the Business Council are carried into 
effect.

(d) He shall sign on behalf of the tribe all official papers 
when authorized to do so.

(e) He shall give supervision to all other officers and employees 
Of the tribe and see that they carry out their duties.

(f)  He shall prepare a report of the activities of the Business 
Council and shall make this report at each regular meeting of 
the Miccosukee General Council. He shall include in this 
report all matters within his knowledge which the interest of 
the tribe may be required be brought to its attention.

(g)  He shall not vote in either the General Council or the 
Business Council except in the case of a tie.

Sec. 2. Assistant Chairman.

(a)  In the absence of the Chairman he shall preside. When so 
presiding, he shall have all rights, privileges and duties, 
as set forth above under duties of Chairman, as well as the 
responsibility of the Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary

(a) He shall keep minutes at the principal place of business 
of the tribe of all meetings of the Miccosukee General Council 
and the Miccosukee Business Council.

(b)  He shall give and serve all notices of the Miccosukee 
General Council and the Miccosukee Business Council as 
required by this constitution and bylaws.

(c)  He shall keep the membership roll of the tribe, showing 
all changes as required by this constitution. In addition, 
he shall keep a current voting list.

(d) He shall attend to all such correspondence assigned to him 
by the Chairman and perform all other duties of his office or as 
prescribed by the Miccosukee General Council or the Miccosukee 
Business Council.

See. 4. Treasurer

(a)  He shall keep and maintain, open to inspection by members 

. of the tribe or representatives of the Commissioner of Indian 

Affairs, at all reasonable times, adequate and correct accounts 
of the properties and business transactions of the tribe.

(b)  He shall have care and custody of the funds and valuables 
Of the tribe, and shall deposit same in the name of and to the 
credit of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida, with such 
banks as the Miccosukee Business Council may direct, subject to 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative.

(c)  Disburse the funds of the tribe as may be ordered by the 
Miccosukee Business Council, taking properly signed invoices, 
vouchers or other instruments for said disbursement. All checks 
shall be countersigned by the Chairman or in his absence the 
Assistant Chairman.

(d)  He shall make a monthly report and account for all 
transactions Involving the disbursement, collection or obli
gation of tribal funds to the Miccosukee Business Council. He 
shall make such a financial report to the Miccosukee General 
Council at each of its regular meetings.

(e)  The Treasurer and all officers and employees whose duties 
involve handling of tribal money or other valuables shall be 
bonded as required by the Miccosukee Business Council and as 
approved by the Superintendent or other officer in charge.

Sec. Lawmaker

(a)  He shall act as Lawmaker at all regular and special meetings 
and shall enforce all rules and see that peace and order are kept 
during the sessions of the General Council and Business Council.

(b)  He shall perform other duties as assigned by the General 
Council or the Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE III - EMPLOYMENT

 
 Section 1. The Miccosukee Business Council is authorized to appoint or 
employ such clerical assistance as may be necessary to carry out the 
responsibilities assigned to any of the officers of the tribe.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved November 17, 1961, 

by the Assistant Secretary of the Interior, the attached 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of 

Florida was submitted for ratification to the Miccosukee Indians 

of Florida, and was on December 17  , 1961, duly adopted by

a vote of 41 for and none against, in an election in which at 

least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote cast their 

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization

Act of June 18, 1934 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 

June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

(sgd) Buffalo Tiger

Chairman, Constitutional Committee

(sgd) Sonny Billie

Member, Constitutional Committee

(sgd) Reginald C. Miller 
Program Officer
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, John A. Carver, Jr., Assistant Secretary of the Interior 

of the United. States of America, by virtue of the authority 

granted me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 

amended, do hereby approved the attached Constitution and Bylaws 

of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.

Approval recommended: 

.

(sgd) Philleo Nash
Commissioner
Bureau of Indian Affairs

(sgd) John A. Carver, Jr.
Assistant Secretary of the Interior
 
  
  
  
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.

Date: January 11, 1962 
 

AMENDMENT 
 
 to the  
 
BYLAWS 
 
 of the 
 
 
MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS OF FLORIDA

AMENDMENT I

 
 Section 4 of Article I of the bylaws shall be amended in its entirety 

to read as follows:

Sec. 4. A quorum of the Miccosukee Business Council shall 

constitute three members and no business shall be conducted 

in the absence of a quorum. All decisions shall be by a 

majority vote.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved January 16, 1964, by the Assistant 

Secretary of the Interior, the foregoing Amendment I to the Bylaws 

of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida was submitted for 

adoption to the qualified voters of the Miccosukee Tribe and was 

on April 12, 1964, duly adopted by a vote of 36 for, and 2 against, 

in an election in which at least thirty percent of those entitled to 

vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the 

Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Chairman, Miccosukee General Council

BUFFALO TIGER________________  

Secretary, Miccosukee General Council

JOHN WILLIE_____  

R. MILLER_________________  
Superintendent, Miccosukee 

Agency
 
 

 
 
APPROVAL

 
 I,  STEWART L. UDALL, Secretary of the Interior of the United States 

of America, by virtue of the authority granted to me by the Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the

attached Amendment I to the Bylaws of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians 

of Florida.

STEWART L. UDALL 
Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.

Date: May 7, 1964

AMENDMENT to the CONSTITUTION of the  
 
MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS OF FLORIDA

AMENDMENT II


Section 5 of Article III of the constitution shall be amended to read 
as follows:

Sec. 5. Any enrolled member of the Miccosukee Tribe twenty-three 
years of age or over shall be qualified to seek and hold office as 
an officer of the tribe. No member who has been convicted of a 
felony within three years preceding the date of the election, or 
has been found guilty by the Miccosukee General Council of mis
conduct in Indian Affairs shall be qualified to seek office as 
an officer of the tribe. Except for the first election of 
officers, no person who has been a member of the tribe for less 
than one year immediately preceding the election may be eligible 
to hold office. The Miccosukee General Council shall be the 
sole judge of the qualifications of the officers of the tribe.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Assistant Secretary of the 
Interior on August 5, 1965, the attached Amendment II to the Constitution 
and Bylaws of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida, was submitted 
to the qualified voters of the Miccosukee Tribe and was on September 12, 
1965, duly adopted by a vote of 27 for, and 2 against, in an election in 
which at least 30 percent of the 58 members entitled to vote cast their 
ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 
(49 Stat. 378).

/s/ R. C. Miller_____________________ 
Chairman, Election Board

/s/ Buffalo Tiger____________________ 
Election Board Member

/s/ John Poole
Election Board Member

I. Harry R. Anderson, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Amendment II to the Constitution of the 
Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.

(Sgd.) Harry R. Anderson

Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
  
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.
Date: October 7, 1965 
 

AMENDMENT

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 

 
  of the
 
 

MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF FLORIDA

AMENDMENT III

 
 Section 2 of Article III - GOVERNING BODY shall be amended to read 
as follows:

Sec. 2. The officers of the Miccosukee General 
Council shall consist of a chairman, assistant chairman, 
secretary, treasurer, and lawmaker. The officers 
shall hold office for a term of four years . Officers shall 
be elected and seated during the month of November. 
All officers will hold office until their successors are 
elected and seated.
 
 

 
CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Assistant Secretary 

of the Interior on July 16, 1973, the attached Amendment III to the 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida was 

submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe, and was on October 27 
 
 

,

 
 1973, duly adopted by a vote of 44 for, and 8 against, in an 

election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 78 entitled to 

vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) , as amended by the

Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

 
APPROVAL

 
 I, Marvin L. Franklin, Assistant to the Secretary of the Interior

of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 

to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do 

hereby approve Amendment III to the Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.

Approval Recommended: (sgd) Raymond V. Butler

Acting Director, Office of 
Indian Services

(Sgd) Marvin L. Franklin 

Assistant to the

 Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C.

Date: 1973
 
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF FLORIDA

AMENDMENT IV


Section 8 of Article V - POWERS OF THE MICCOSUKEE BUSINESS 
COUNCIL shall be amended to read as follows:

Sec. 8. To make and perform contracts and agreements 

 of every description, not inconsistent with law or the 

provisions of this constitution and bylaws, and to 
charter corporations and other organizations for the 

 purpose of advancing the economic and social welfare 

of the people.

• 
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Assistant Secretary 

of the Interior on July 16, 1973, the attached Amendment IV to the 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida was 

submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe, and was on October 27, 

1973, duly adopted a vote of 39 for, and 13 against, in an 

election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 78 entitled to 

 vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) , as amended by the 

Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378) .

1
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Marvin L. Franklin, Assistant to the Secretary of the Interior

of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 

to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do 

hereby approve Amendment IV to the Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.

Approval Recommended:

(Sgd) Raymond V. Butler

Acting Director, Office of 
Indian Services

(Sgd) Marvin L. Franklin

Assistant to theSecretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C.

Date: NOV 9 1973
 
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
 
 of the  
 
MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF FLORIDA

AMENDMENT V


Section 1 of Article 1 of the bylaws, MEETINGS, shall be amended to 
read as follows:

Section 1. There shall be four regularly scheduled 
meetings of the Miccosukee General Council to be held 
during the months of November, February, June and
August. All meetings shall be on the first Saturday of
the above-mentioned months. Notices shall be posted for 
these meetings at least three days in advance of the meeting, 
giving the time, date and place of such meeting. Special 
meetings of the Miccosukee General Council may be called 
by a majority vote of the Miccosukee Business Council.
Special meetings shall be noticed and posted at least 

 three days in advance giving time, date and place of such 

meeting.
 
 

 
CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Deputy Assistant Secretary 

of the Interior on July 16, 1973, the attached Amendment V to the

Constitution and Bylaws of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida was 

submitted to the qualified voters of the tribe, and was on October 27,

1973, duly adopted by a vote of 42 for, and 10 against, in an 

election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 78 entitled to 

 vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 

Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) , as amended by the 

Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Assistant to the Secretary of the Interior

of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 

to me by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do 

hereby approve Amendment V to the Constitution and Bylaws of the 

Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.

Approval Recommended: (Sgd) Raymond V. Butler
 
  
  
 

- 

 
 1.1.,  
 



 
 Acting Director, Office of
Indian Services

(Sgd) Marvin L. Franklin

Assistant to the Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C.

Date: Nov. 9, 1973


 
AMENDMENT

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE 
MICCOSUKEE TRIBE OF INDIANS
OF FLORIDA

AMENDMENT VI


Article V of the Constitution, POWERS OF THE MICCOSUKEE BUSINESS 
COUNCIL, is hereby amended by inserting the following new Section 4 
and renumbering Sections 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10 and 11 as Sections 5, 6, 
7, 8, 9, 10, 11 and 12 respectively.

Sec. 4. To pass ordinances governing the conduct of its members 
and providing for the maintenance of law and order and the 
administration of justice within lands set apart for the occupancy 
of the tribe.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Deputy

Commissioner of Indian Affairs November 24th, 1976, the attached 

Amendment VI to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Miccosukee 

Tribe of Indians of Florida was duly 

adopted

by a vote of 58 for,

and 18 against, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) 

of the 94 persons entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance 

with Section 16 of The Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 

(48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, (Sgd.) Raymond V. Butler, Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 

by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by 

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, and delegated 

to me by 230 DM 1.1, do hereby approve Amendment No. VI to the 

Constitution and Bylaws of the Miccosukee Tribe of Indians of Florida.

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.
MAR 31 1977

Date:_________________

