 
 Middletown Rancheria
Of 
Pomo Indians
Of 
California 
 

CONSTITUTION

CONSTITUTION OF 
THE MIDDLETOWN RANCHERIA OF POMO INDIANS OF CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Middletown Rancheria, as established by Secretarial Order dated 
July 30, 1910, as an exercise of our sovereign power, in order to organize for our common good, 
to govern ourselves pursuant to our own laws, to preserve and protect our common and natural 
resources, to provide for the welfare and prosperity of our people, hereby adopt this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The territory of the Tribe shall encompass all lands, historical, current and hereinafter, 

owned by or reserved for the Tribe, held in trust for the Tribe and/or held in trust for any member 
of the Tribe by the United States.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Sec. 1 - Eligibility for Membership

An individual is eligible for membership in the Tribe, if

A. 
B. 

C. 

Their name appears on the official base roll dated June 3, 1935, as corrected; or
They are a lineal descendant of a person whose name appears on the base roll
dated June 3, 1935, as corrected, or
Their name appears on the 1998 voters list and lineal descendants thereof.

Sec. 2 - Membership Procedure and Enrollment Ordinance

A. 

B. 

C. 

Membership. The membership of the Middletown Rancheria shall consist of all 
persons who meet the criteria of Section 1(A), 1 (B) or 1 (C) above, who are not 
currently enrolled as members of another federally recognized tribe or band, and 
whose application for enrollment has been accepted in accordance with the rules 
promulgated in the Enrollment Ordinance.
Enrollment Ordinance. Within six (6) months of the Tribal Council’s first 
election to office under this Constitution, the General Council shall enact an 
Enrollment Ordinance establishing procedures for processing membership 
applications. The Enrollment Ordinance shall contain fair and reasonable 
enrollment procedures, including the right to appeal and provisions for keeping 
the roll current.
Revocation of Membership. Membership may be revoked pursuant to procedures

set forth in the Enrollment Ordinance.

Sec. 3. - Dual Membership Prohibition.

Any member of the Tribe who applies for and is accepted as a member of another 

federally recognized Tribe or band shall be subject to disenrollment in accordance with the 
Enrollment Ordinance.

Sec. 4 - Membership Rights of Children Who Have Been Adopted.

Any child who is less than 18 years of age, who does not meet the membership criteria 

but has been adopted by a tribal member may participate in tribal youth activities.
 
 

ARTICLE III - CONSTITUTIONAL RIGHTS

 
 Sec. 1 - Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968, 25 U.S.C. 1301 - 1303

The Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (ICRA) was passed by Congress and applies to tribal 
governments in an effort to protect certain minimum civil liberties. The rights guaranteed in the 
ICRA apply in general to all persons rather than tribal members. This Constitution guarantees 
these and other enumerated rights. Habeas Corpus is a term used in the ICRA, 1303, which 
describes a legal request made to a federal court by a person detained by the tribe. A Writ of 
Habeas Corpus generally asks the federal court to review the legality of the detention. The ICRA 
as it appears at the time that this Constitution was adopted is as follows:

INDIAN CIVIL RIGHTS ACT OF 1968 - 25 U.S.C. 1301 - 1303

130J. Definitions 

For purposes of this subchapter, the term:

1. 

2. 

"Indian tribe" means any tribe, band, or other group of Indians subject to the 
jurisdiction of the United States and recognized as possessing powers of self
government.

"powers of self-government" means and includes all governmental powers 
possessed by an Indian tribe, executive, legislative, and judicial, and all offices, 
bodies, and tribunals by and through which they are executed, including courts of 
Indian offenses; and means the inherent power of Indian tribes, hereby recognized 
and affirmed, to exercise criminal jurisdiction over all Indians;

3. 

"Indian court" means any Indian tribal court or court of Indian offense and;

4.  "Indian" means any person who would be subject to the jurisdiction of the United 
States as an Indian under section 1153, title 18, United States Code, if that person 

were to commit an offense listed in that section in Indian country to which that 
section applies."

1302. Constitutional Rights No Indian tribe in exercising powers of self-government shall:

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

8. 

make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging the 
freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to 
assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances;

violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and 
effects against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;

take any property for a public use without just compensation;

deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial,
to be informed of the nature and cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the 
witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his 
favor, and at his own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual 
punishments, and in no event impose for conviction of any one offense any 
penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of one year or a fine 
of $5,000 or both;

deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or 
deprive any person of liberty or property without due process of law;

9. 

pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or

10. 

deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the right,
upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than six persons.

1303.  Habeas corpus

The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall be available to any person, in a court of 
the United States, to test the legality of his detention by order of an Indian tribe.

Sec. 2 - Other Enumerated Rights

Each enrolled member of the Middletown Rancheria shall have the following additional 

rights:

A. 

B. 

To participate in its governmental and other activities in accordance with 
eligibility requirements set forth by the Tribal Enrollment Ordinance; and,
To exercise traditional rights and privileges of members of the Middletown 
Rancheria not in conflict with this Constitution, tribal laws and ordinances.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 The governing body of the Middletown Rancheria shall be the Tribal Council. Except as 

expressly reserved in this Constitution, the people of the Middletown Rancheria by this 
Constitution confer upon the Tribal Council, the authority to exercise the sovereign powers of 
the tribe. The General Council retains all rights and authority not reserved to the Tribal Council.

Sec. 1 - Powers Vested in the Tribal Council

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 

E. 

To exercise the inherent sovereign power of the Tribe by implementing
ordinances and adopting resolutions consistent with this Constitution, in the 
following areas:
i. 

To govern the conduct of the members and other persons within tribal 
jurisdiction;
To promote, protect and provide for the public health, safety and welfare 
of the Tribe and its members; and
To provide by ordinance tribal jurisdiction over Indian Child Welfare 
matters, and other domestic matters;

ii. 

iii. 

that have been approved by the General Council; or
that are less than $10,000 in value.

To authorize and ratify agreements and contracts negotiated with federal, state,
local and tribal governments or their departments, or with private persons on 
matters:
i, 
ii. 
To purchase, lease, take by gift, devise or bequest, or otherwise acquire land,
interests in land, personal property or other assets which may be deemed 
beneficial to the Tribe where acquiring such assets:
i. 
ii. 
To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal land,
interests in land, personal property or other asset where the disposition of such an 
interest in land or property:
i. 
ii. 
To employ legal counsel,

has been approved by the General Council; or
are less than $10,000 in value.

has been approved by the General Council; or
is less than $10,000 in value.

F. 

G. 

H. 
I. 

J. 

which has been approved by the General Council; or 

i. 
ii. for work that is less than $10,000 in value.
To create, pursuant to an ordinance, commissions or other organizations which
may exercise specific delegated authority to manage the affairs and enterprises of 
the Tribe;
To establish rules and procedures to regulate all meetings of the Tribal Council,
committees and other regulatory commissions created by ordinance;
To establish a tribal court or other dispute resolution forum;
To create an annual budget for the approval of the General Council, manage any
funds within the exclusive control of the Tribe and to appropriate these funds for 
the benefit of the Tribe and its members, levy taxes and assessments, and borrow 
money for public purposes; and
To take action not inconsistent with this Constitution or Federal law, which shall
be necessary to carry out the sovereign legislative powers of the Tribe.

Sec. 2 - Election of the Tribal Council

The Tribal Council shall consist of five members elected by a vote of the General 
Council in accordance with the Election Procedures and Ordinance. The General Council will 
elect members to serve as Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary, Treasurer and Tribal 
Representative.

Sec. 3 - Tribal Powers and Rights Not Limited.

Any rights and powers vested in the Tribe but not expressly referred to in this 
Constitution shall not be diminished, abridged or divested by this Article. The Tribal Council 
may exercise additional powers as conferred upon the Tribe pursuant to agreements or law.
 
 

ARTICLE V - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 Sec. 1 - Powers and Duties of the General Council

All enrolled members of the Middletown Rancheria who are eighteen (18) years of age or 

older shall constitute the General Council. The General Council shall have the power to:

A. 

B. 

C. 

D. 
E. 

Elect Tribal Council members and approve or disapprove any salary or wages
paid for performance of Tribal Council duties;
Exercise the powers of initiative and referendum pursuant to Sections 3 and 4 of
this Article;
Recall elected tribal officials pursuant to Article XII of the Election Procedures &
Ordinance;
Amend this Constitution in accordance with Article X; and
Make advisory recommendations to the Tribal Council.

Sec. 3 - Initiative Process - Method by which members can propose an ordinance or resolution 
for adoption by the membership

Any member may propose an ordinance or resolution for adoption by a majority vote of 

the membership. To do so, the member must submit an Initiative Petition Form that contains the 
proposed ordinance or resolution as well as signatures from at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
General Council of Middletown Rancheria. Within sixty (60) days of receiving and verifying the 
petition, the Secretary and Chair will submit the proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of the 
General Council at a regular or special election. The vote of a majority of those actually voting 
at a General Council meeting shall be conclusive and binding upon the Tribal Council.

Sec. 4 - Referendum Process - Method by which members may review any proposed or existing 
ordinance or resolution

A member may request an opportunity to accept or reject proposed or existing ordinances 
or resolutions through the referendum process. To do so, the member must submit a Referendum 
Petition Form that identifies and contains the text of the specific ordinance or resolution to be 
reviewed. The petition must also contain signatures of at least thirty percent (30%) of the 
General Council of the Middletown Rancheria. Within sixty (60) days of receiving and verifying 
the petition, the Secretary and Chair will submit the proposed ordinance or resolution to a vote of 
the General Council at a regular or special election to be held by the Election Board. The vote of 
a majority of those actually voting shall be conclusive and binding upon the Tribal Council.

Sec. 5 - Limitations on General Council Powers

The General Council shall not have the power to take any of the following actions under 

this Article:

A. 
B. 

Reverse, overturn or otherwise influence any judicial action of the Tribal Court;
Take any action which is otherwise in violation of this Constitution

Sec. 6 - Legislative Appeals Committee

The Legislative Appeals Committee shall consist of three members elected by the 
General Council. The Legislative Appeals Committee authority shall include, but is not limited 
to, the power to review and overturn tribal legislative and executive actions for violations of this 
Constitution or Tribal Ordinances. The Tribal Council shall set forth qualifications for serving 
on the Legislative Appeals Committee. During the tenure on the Legislative Appeals 
Committee, a member may be suspended or dismissed by the Tribal Council only for gross 
neglect, confidentiality or constitutional violation, upon due notice and an opportunity for a 
hearing open to tribal members.

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL COURT/DISPUTE RESOLUTION FORUM

Sec 1 - Judicial Power

The judicial power of the Tribe shall be vested in a Tribal judiciary which shall consist of 

the Tribal Court, a Court of Appeals and other specific courts as the Tribal Council may from 
time to time ordain and establish.

Sec. 2 - Powers of the Tribal Court

A. 

The judicial powers of the Tribe shall extend to all cases and matters in law and
equity arising under this Constitution, the laws and ordinances of or applicable to 
the Tribe including but not limited to:

i. 

ii. 

iii. 

iv. 

v. 

vi. 

vii. 

To adjudicate all civil and criminal matters arising within the jurisdiction 
of the Tribe or to which the Tribe or an enrolled member of the Tribe is a 
party.
To review ordinances and resolutions of the Tribal Council or General 
Council to ensure they are consistent with this Constitution and rule void 
those ordinances and resolutions deemed inconsistent with this 
Constitution.
Hear cases based on ordinances and laws of the Tribe for purpose of 
determining innocence or guilt where trial by jury has been waived.
Assign fines and penalties as allowed for violations of Tribal law, as 
allowed by Tribal and Federal Law.
Grant warrants for search to enforcement officers when just cause is 
shown.
Grant warrants, writs, injunctions and orders not inconsistent with this 
Constitution.
Establish, by general rules, the practice and procedures for all courts of the 
Tribe.

Sec. 3 - Judicial Independence.

To promote the independence of the judiciary, the members of the judiciary shall be 

recruited from tribes, tribal courts or other entities outside the Middletown tribal community. 
The Tribal Judiciary shall be independent from the legislative functions of the tribal government. 
No person exercising legislative powers of the government shall exercise powers properly 
belonging to the judicial branch of government; provided that the Tribal Council reserves the 
power to conduct administrative hearings and/or create committees and/or commissions that 
exercise administrative hearing powers.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - POWERS OF THE TRIBE NOT DIMINISHED

 
 Sec. 1 - Any rights and powers vested in the Tribe but not expressly referred to in this 
Constitution shall not be diminished by this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - ELECTIONS

 
 Sec. l - First Election

Notwithstanding the above provisions, the election of the first Tribal Council under this 

Constitution shall be in accordance with an election ordinance enacted by the Interim Tribal 
Council which is in accordance as much as is feasible with the above provisions, and which is 
made available to the tribal membership no more than sixty (60) days after certification of the 
adoption of this Constitution. The Ordinance shall provide that the election be held no later than 
one- hundred-twenty (120) days after adoption of the Constitution, and may provide that there 
will be no regular, annual election of Tribal Council members thereafter until April of the 
following year.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

 
 Sec. 1 - Waivers of Sovereign Immunity

The Tribal Council shall not waive or limit the right of the Tribe to be immune from suit 
in any court of competent jurisdiction, except as authorized by tribal ordinance or resolution or in 
furtherance of tribal business enterprises. Except as authorized by tribal ordinance or resolution, 
no provisions of this Constitution shall be construed to waive or limit tribal sovereign immunity.

Sec. 2 - Express Waivers

The governmental right of sovereign immunity protects the resources of the tribe for the 

benefit of the membership. There shall be no implied waivers of tribal sovereign immunity. 
Any waiver of sovereign immunity must be explicit and use the following format: “The 
Middletown Rancheria expressly waives it right to sovereign immunity for [name of specific 
event, time frame and/ maximum dollar amount]. ” Without this specific language, no waiver of 
sovereign immunity may be implied. Only the Tribal Council, in its official capacity, may 
explicitly waive the tribal sovereign immunity of the Middletown Rancheria. A tribal member 
may not waive the sovereign immunity of the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE X - AMENDMENT

 
 This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the 

Middletown Rancheria voting at an election called for that purpose, provided that at least fifty- 
one percent (51%) of the eligible voters shall vote in favor of the amendment.

The election shall be conducted in accordance with rules and regulations as set forth by 

the Tribe. It shall be the duty of the Tribal Council to authorize an election on any proposed 
amendment at the request of a majority of the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this Constitution shall, in the future, be declared invalid by a court of 

competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision(s) shall be severed and the remaining provisions 
shall continue in full force and effect. Those provision(s) found to be invalid shall be addressed 
by the General Council and changes adopted in accordance with Article XII of this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XII  - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority of the qualified voters of the Middletown 
Rancheria who vote in an election called for that purpose, shall be effective from the date of 
approval, provided that at least a majority of eligible voters vote in favor of adoption of the 
Constitution.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 This Constitution was adopted by the General Council of the Middletown Rancheria at an 

election conducted on Saturday, January 8th, 2005 where the General Council voted 35 

For, and 5 Against, with 46 Abstaining and 2 Invalid Ballots to adopt this Constitution.

1-10-05

Date

1-11-05

Date

