 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

MOAPA BAND OF PAIUTE INDIANS

OF THE

MOAPA RIVER RESERVATION, NEVADA


 
  
  
 APPROVED APRIL 17, 1942 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1943 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE MOAPA BAND OF
PAIUTE INDIANS OF THE MOAPA RIVER RESERVA
TION, NEVADA

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians, in order 
to establish a legal organization, promote the general welfare, conserve 
and develop our land, and secure to ourselves and our posterity the 
power to exercise certain rights of home rule not inconsistent with 
Federal, State and local laws, do ordain and establish this Constitu
tion for the Moapa Band or Paiute Indians of the Moapa River 
Reservation in the State of Nevada.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians shall extend 
to the territory within the confines of the Moapa River Indian Reser
vation as established by the Executive Order of February 12, 1874, the 
Act of Congress of March 3, 1875 (18 Stat. 420), and the Executive 
Orders of July 31, 1903, and November 26, 1912, and to such other 
lands as may be hereafter added thereto.

Article II—Membership

Section. 1. The membership of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians 

shall consist as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll of the Band as of April 1, 1940: Provided, That such roll 
may be corrected by the Business Council with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior within one year after approval of this 
Constitution and By-laws.

(b)  All children born to any member of the Moapa Band of Paiute 
Indians who is a resident of the Reservation at the time of the birth of 
said children.

Sec. 2. The Business Council shall have the power to promulgate 
ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, govern
ing future membership and the adoption of new members when the 
resources of the reservation make such adoption feasible.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians 

shall consist of a council, known as the Business Council.

Sec. 2. The Business Council shall consist of six members duly 

elected to serve three years, two members being elected each year.

Sec. 3. The Business Council so organized shall elect from within 
its own number, (1) a chairman, (2) a vice-chairman; and from within 
or without, (3) a secretary, and (4) a treasurer; and may appoint or 
employ such other officers or committees as may be deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. The present Council, within sixty days after ratification and 
approval of this Constitution, shall call a general tribal meeting for 
the election of officers in accordance with this Constitution. The two 
candidates receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office until 
December 1944; the two candidates receiving the next highest number 
of votes shall hold office until December 1943; the two candidates 
receiving the third highest number of votes shall hold office until 
December 1942. Thereafter, the term of office for councilmen elected 
under this Constitution shall be three years. After the first election, 
elections for the Business Council shall be held on the second Tuesday 
of December.

Sec. 5. All elections shall be by secret ballot and shall be held in 
accordance with rules and regulations prescribed by the Business 
Council or by an election board appointed by the Business Council.

Article IV—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a Council member shall die, resign, or permanently 
leave the reservation, or be removed from office for cause, the Council 
shall declare the position vacant and appoint a successor to serve 
until the annual general tribal meeting in December, at which time 
the general tribal meeting shall elect a successor for the unexpired 
term.

Sec. 2. The Business Council may. by two-thirds vote, expel any 
member for neglect of duty or gross misconduct, provided such 
charges are in writing subscribed by competent witnesses and formally 
served upon the accused at least five days prior to the hearing. The 
accused member shall be given a full and fair opportunity to reply 
to any and all such charges against himself, and also the opportunity 
to summon witnesses in his behalf.

Sec. 3. Upon receipt of a petition signed by one-third of the eligible 
voters of the reservation calling for the recall of any member or mem
bers of the Council named in said petition, it shall be the duty of the 
Council to call an election on such recall petition. No member may 
be recalled in any such election unless at least 30 percent of the legal 
voters of the reservation shall vote at such election. In the event the 
majority of those voting in such election favor such recall from office, 
the office shall be declared vacant and the Council shall proceed in 
the usual manner to fill the said vacancy.

Article V—Powers of the Business Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Business Council of the 
Moapa River Indian Reservation shall exercise the following powers, 
subject to any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Constitution 
of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments.
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To veto or approve any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 

of tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all ap
propriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the reservation 

prior to submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 

Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises on the Moapa 
River Indian Reservation in accordance with the terms of a charter 
that may be issued to the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians by the Secre
tary of the Interior.

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, providing for the maimer 
of making, holding and revoking assignments of tribal land or in
terests therein; providing for the levying of taxes and the appropria
tion of available funds of the Band for public purposes; providing 
for the licensing of nonmembers coming upon the reservation for pur
poses of hunting, fishing, trading or other business; providing for the 
maintenance of law and order and administration of justice by estab
lishing a reservation court and defining its duties and powers; and 
providing for the exclusion from the reservation of persons not legally 
entitled to reside thereon.

(g) To regulate the inheritance of real and personal property, 
except allotted lands, within the territory of the Moapa River Indian 
Reservation, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(h)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinance or. resolution, subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(i)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards or 
officials of the reservation, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.
(j)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and attached By-laws regulating the procedure of the Business Council 
and of other organizations of the Moapa River Indian Reservation.
Sec. 2. Future Powers.—The Business Council may exercise such 
further powers as may in the future be delegated to it by the Secretary 
of the Interior, or any other duly authorized official or agency of the 
State or Federal government.

Sec. 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians but not expressly referred to in 
this Constitution, shall not be abridged by this Article, but may be 
exercised by the members of the Band through the adoption of appro
priate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this Constitution shall be subject to review by the Secre
tary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent in charge 
of the Reservation, who shall, within ten days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same. If the Superintendent shall approve any or
dinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become effective, but the 
Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorse
ment to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety days 
from the date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution 
for any cause, by notifying the Business Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him within ten days after its enactment, he 
shall advise the Council of his reasons therefor. If these reasons 
appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by majority vote, refer the 

ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, 
within ninety days from the date of its enactment, approve the same 
in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become 
effective.

Article VI—Bill of Bights

Section 1. Suffrage.—Any member of the Moapa Band of Paiute 
Indians twenty-one (21) years of age or over, who has resided on the 
reservation for one year immediately preceding any election, shall be 
entitled to vote or to hold office therein.

Sec. 2. Economic Rights.—All members of the Band shall be ac
corded equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources 
and activities of the reservation.
 Sec. 3. Civil Liberties.—All members of the Band shall enjoy with
out hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, 
and association.

Article VII—Land

Section 1. Allotted Lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands, belonging to any member of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians 
shall continue to be held as heretofore by their present owners. It is 
recognized that under existing law such lands may be condemned for 
public purposes, such as roads, public buildings, or other public im
provements, upon payment of adequate compensation, by any agency 
of the State of Nevada or of the Federal Government. It is further 
recognized that under existing law, such lands may be inherited by 
the heirs of the present owner, whether or not they are members of 
the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians. Likewise, it is recognized that 
under existing law, the Secretary of the Interior may, at his discretion, 
remove restrictions upon such land, upon application by the Indian 
owner, whereupon the land will become subject to state taxes and may 
then be mortgaged or sold.

The right of the individual Indian to hold or to part with his land, 
as under existing law, shall not be abrogated by anything contained 
in this Constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily convey his land 
to the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians, under such terms as may be 
agreed upon.

Sec. 2. Tribal Land.—The unallotted lands of the Moapa River 
Reservation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the 
Moapa Band of Paiute Indians of the Moapa River Reservation or by 
the United States in trust for the Band, shall be held as tribal lands 
and shall be used in accordance with a land use agreement to be entered 
into between the tribe and the Secretary of the Interior, and no part 
of such lands shall be mortgaged or sold. Tribal lands shall not be 
allotted to individual Indians, but agricultural lands may be assigned 
to members of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians, or otherwise used 
by the Band as specified in the land use agreement.

Sec. 3. Grant of Standard Assignments.—Tribal lands now owned 
by the Band or which may be hereafter acquired for the Band by the 
United States, or purchased by the Band out of tribal funds, may be 
assigned to members of the Band for the purpose of establishing 
homes for landless Indians, in accordance with the provisions of the 

land use agreement to be entered into by the Band and the Secretary 
of the Interior. Assignments made under this section shall be known 
as Standard Assignments.

Sec. 4. Grant of Exchange Assignments.—Any member of the Band 
who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land may voluntarily 
transfer his interest in such land to the Band in exchange for an 
assignment of the same land or other land of equal value. Assign
ments made under this Section shall be known as Exchange Assign
ments.

Sec. 5. Leasing of Exchange Assignments.—Exchange assignments 
may be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian cooperative 
associations, to individual members of the Band, or, if no individual 
Indian or Indian cooperative association is able and willing to rent 
the land at a reasonable fee, such assignments may be leased to non
Indians in the same manner as allotted lands.

Sec. 6. Inheritance of Exchange Assignments.—Upon the death 
of the holder of any exchange assignment, such land shall be re
assigned by the Business Council to his heirs or devisees, subject to 
the following conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or to devisees 
who are not members of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians, except 
that a life assignment may be made to the surviving widower or 
widow of the holder of the assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heirs or devisees who 
already hold more than a specified number of acres of land, or inter
ests in land of equal value, either under allotment or under assign
ment, the number of acres and the value of the interests to be 
determined from time to time by the Council.

(c)  Such lands may not be subdivided among heirs or devisees into 

units too small for convenient management.

(d)  If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the pro
visions of Section 3 of this Article.

Sec. 7. Inheritance of Improvements.—Improvements of any char
acter made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and inherited 
by members of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians, or otherwise dis
posed of, under the terms of the land use agreement. No permanent 
improvements shall be removed from the land without the consent of 
the Business Council.

Sec. 8. Exchange of Assignments.—Assignments may be exchanged 
between members of the Band by common consent of the parties con
cerned, in such manner as the land use agreement may provide.

Article VIII—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians, voting 
at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior; 
Provided, That at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote 
in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it 
shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment at the request of two-thirds of 

the members of the Business Council, or upon presentation of a peti
tion signed by one-third of the qualified voters, members of the Moapa 
Band of Paiute Indians.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE MOAPA BAND OF PAIUTE INDIANS OF THE 
MOAPA RIVER RESERVATION

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman of the Business Council.—The Chairman of 
the Business Council shall preside over all meetings of the Business 
Council, shall perform all duties of the Chairman and exercise any 
authority delegated to him by the Business Council. The Chairman 
shall also preside at all meetings of the Band. He shall have no vote 
except in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman of the Business Council.—The Vice
Chairman shall assist the Chairman when called upon so to do, and in 
the absence of the Chairman, he shall preside. When so presiding, he 
shall have all the rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of the 
Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary of the Business Council.—The Secretary shall 
keep a full report of all proceedings of each regular and special meet
ing of the Business Council and of the Band, and shall perform such 
other duties of like nature as the Business Council shall from time to 
time by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of the minutes of 
each meeting to the Superintendent in charge of the reservation and 
to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 4. Treasurer of the Business Council.—The Treasurer shall be 
the custodian of all moneys which may come under the jurisdiction 
or into the control of the Business Council. He shall pay out money 
in accordance with the orders and resolutions of the Business Council. 
He shall keep an account of all receipts and disbursements and shall 
report the same to the Business Council at each regular meeting.

He shall be bonded in such an amount as the Business Council may, 
by resolution approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, provide. 
The books of the Treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection at 
the direction of the Business Council or the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs. Until the Treasurer is bonded, the Business Council shall 
make such provision for the custody and the disbursing of funds as 
shall guarantee their safe and proper disbursement and use.

Sec. 5. Duties of Appointive Officers and Boards.—The duties of all 
appointive officers or boards shall be clearly defined by resolution of 
the Business Council at the time of their creation or appointment. 
Such boards and officers shall report from time to time, as required, to 
the Business Council, and their activities and decisions shall be sub
ject to review by the Business Council upon the complaint of any 
person aggrieved.

Sec. 6. It shall be the duty of the Business Council, and every member 
thereof, to promote the general welfare of the members of the Band, 
and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this Constitution and 
By-laws.

Article II—Certificate of Election

It shall be the duty of the Business Council, or a board appointed 
by them, to certify to the election of newly elected Council members 
within five days after the election, and thereupon they shall be notified 
by the Secretary of the Business Council of their election.

Article III—Compensation of Council Members

The Business Council may prescribe such compensation for officers 
and members of the Business Council as it deems advisable from such 
funds as may be available, subject to approval at the general meeting 
of the Band in the annual December meeting.

Article IV—Time and Place of Meetings

Section 1. Meetings.—Regular meetings of the Business Council 
shall be held at the Moapa Sub-Agency quarterly, the time and place 
to be designated by the Council by resolution.

Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or by written notice 
signed by a majority of the Business Council members, and when so 
called, the Business Council shall have power to transact business as 
in regular meetings.

Sec. 2. Quorum.—No business shall be transacted unless a quorum 

is present. A quorum shall consist of four Council members.

A quorum at a general meeting of the Band shall consist of one-third 

of the eligible voters.

Sec. 3. Annual Tribal Meeting.—There shall be an annual tribal 
meeting open to all members of the Band, held at the Sub-Agency. At 
this annual meeting, elections shall be held as designated heretofore 
in this Constitution. It shall be the duty of the Chairman to make 
a report at said meeting of the activities of the Business Council 
throughout the year, and to outline proposed plans for the economic 
and social betterment of the reservation.

Sec. 4. Special Tribal Meeting.—Special tribal meetings may be 
called by the Chairman, provided due notice is posted within the 
reservation at least five days prior to such meeting. Thirty percent 
of the legal voters of the Band may at any time, by written petition, 
call a special tribal meeting, provided at least five days’ notice is 
posted within the reservation.

Sec. 5. Order of Business.—The order of business at any regular or 

special meeting of the Business Council shall be as follows:

1.  Call to order by the Chairman.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the Treasurer.
6.  Reading of communications.
7.  Unfinished business.
8.  New business.
9.  Adjournment.

Article V—Installation of Officers and Council Members

Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of office 
prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall pledge 
himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United States 
and this Constitution and By-laws:

Oath: “I, 

, do solemnly swear that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; that I will carry out faithfully and impartially the duties 
of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote 
and protect the best interests of my people, in accordance with this 
Constitution and By-laws.”

Article VI—Ratification of Constitution and By-Laws

This Constitution and By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote 
of the voters of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians of the Moapa River 
Indian Reservation, voting at a special election called by the Secretary 
of the Interior in which at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his 
approval, and shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved February 13, 1942, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Moapa Band of Paiute 
Indians and was on March 15, 1942, duly ratified by a vote of 55 for and 
2 against, in an election in which more than 30 percent of those entitled 
to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the 
Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

F. A. Fones,

Acting Superintendent, Carson Agency.

Francis Swain,

Election Board.

Roger Benn, 
Secretary. Election Board.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the act of June 18,1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Moapa Band of Paiute 
Indians of the Moapa River Indian Reservation in Nevada.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and 
By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the members of the Moapa 
Band of Paiute Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended April 13, 1942.

William Zimmerman, Jr., 

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., April 17,1942.

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary.
[seal]
 
  
 

AMENDMENT
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
 
 of the 
 
MOAPA BAND OF PAIUTE INDIANS OF THE MOAPA RIVER RESERVATION 
NEVADA

AMENDMENT I


Article II of the tribal constitution shall be amended in its entirety 
to read as follows:

Section 1. The membership of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians 
shall consist of the following:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the 
official census roll of the Band as of January 1, 1940; pro
vided, that such persons have not relinquished their membership 
in the Moapa Band nor been enrolled with another tribe.

(b)  All children born to any member of the Moapa Band of 
Paiute Indians; provided, that children born after the date 
of the approval of this amendment by the Secretary of the 
Interior must possess at least one-fourth (1/4) degree Paiute 
Indian blood to be eligible for membership.

Sec. 2. The membership roll may be corrected at any time by 
the Business Council with the approval of the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs.

Sec. 3. The Business Council shall have the power to 
promulgate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, governing enrollment procedures, loss of 
membership, and the adoption of new members when the resources 
of the reservation make such adoption feasible.

Sec. 4. Any person refused membership by the Business Council 
shall have the right of appeal to the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an election authorized by the Assistant Secretary of 
the Interior on September 1, 1965, the attached Amendment I to the 
Constitution and Bylaws of the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians of the 
Moapa River Reservation, Nevada, was submitted to the qualified 
voters of the Moapa Band and was on November 20, 1965, duly adopted 
by a vote of 32 for and 11 against, in an election in which at least 
30 percent of the 99 members entitled to vote cast their ballots in 
accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 
(49 Stat. 378).

/s/ Robert S. Hull________ 
Chairman, Election Board

/s/ Eugene Tom____________ 
Election Board Member

/s/ Ethel Tom_____________  
Election Board Member
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Harry R. Anderson, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Amendment I to the Constitution and Bylaws of 
the Moapa Band of Paiute Indians of the Moapa River Reservation, 
Nevada.

(sgd.) Harry R. Anderson

Assistant Secretary of the Interior 
 
 

(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.

Date: April 4, 1966

