DATE DOWNLOADED: Mon Aug 29 13:21:49 2022
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma (1990).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma (1990).

APA 7th ed.
(1990) 

. Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma (S.I.: s.n., 1990)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma (s.n., 1990)

MLA 8th ed.
Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOULicense

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20245

IN REPLY REFER TO:

Tribal Government Services - TR

THROUGH: MUSKOGEE AREA DIRECTOR

JUL 27 1990

Mr. Jack Naylor 
Superintendent, Miami Agency
P. 0. Box 391
Miami, Oklahoma 74355

Dear Mr. Naylor:

We have received the results of the election held on July 9, 1990, by the 
qualified voters of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma. The election was called in 
accordance with an order issued on February 13, 1990, by the Deputy to the 
Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs (Tribal Services) which permitted the 
qualified voters of the Modoc Tribe to vote on the adoption or rejection of a 
preposed constitution.

As evidenced by the completed Certificate of Results of Election, the 
Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma was duly adopted by a vote of 
16 for and 1 against in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of 
the 35 members registered and entitled to vote cast their ballots.

The Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma is hereby approved pursuant to 
the authority granted to the Secretary of the interior by the Act of June 26, 
1936 (49 Stat. 1967), and the Act of May 25, 1978 (92 Stat. 246), and 
delegated to me by 230 D.M. 2.4. Please deliver the enclosed original 
document to the tribe.

Sincerely,

Acting Deputy to the Assistant Secretary - 

Indian Affairs (Tribal Services)

Enclosure
 
 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 
MODOC TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma, in order to establish a 
tribal organization, maintain the traditions of the Modoc Tribe, promote the 
general welfare and exercise the powers of self-government, do hereby ordain 
and establish this constitution for the Modoc Tribe pursuant to the Oklahoma 
Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936, (49 Stat. 1967) and Section 2 of the 
Act of May 25, 1978, (92 Stat. 246).
 
 

ARTICLE I - DEFINITION OF TERMS

 
 SECTION 1. The Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma shall be the name of this tribe and 
shall be composed of all persons Who qualify for membership pursuant to 
Article II of this constitution. The words "Modoc Tribe" as used in thia 
constitution shall have the same meaning as "The Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma."

SECTION 2. The Modoc Tribal Council shall be the governing body of the 
Modoc Tribe and shall consist of all enrolled members of the tribe who are 
at least eighteen (18) years of age and over.

SECTION 3. The Modoc Elected Council shall be a five (5) member 
representative duly elected by the Modoc Tribal Council empowered to act on 
behalf of the Modoc Tribe on those matters set forth in this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. The membership of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma shall consist of 
the following persons, Provided, That they are citizens of the United 
States:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

All persons named on the 1878 Modoc Census of Subsistence and 
Ration as approved by the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary - 
Indian Affairs on October 14, 1981. All persons named on that 
roll are hereby declared to be fullblood members of the tribe for 
the purpose of computing the degree of blood of their descendants,

All direct lineal descendants of persons named on the 1878 Census 
designated as the base roll in Section 1 (a) above who did not 
return to Klamath, Oregon, pursuant to the Act of March 9, 1909, 
(35 Stat. 751), arid the descendants of such Indians who otherwise 
meet the requirements adopted by the tribe.

For purposes of identification and association, those individuals 
listed on the final roll of the members of the Klamath Tribe of 
Indians as published in the Federal Register of May 13, 1955 (20 
F,R. 3269), pursuant to Section 3 of the Act of August 13, 1954, 
(68 Stat. 718) shall be defined members of the Modoc Tribe of 
Oklahoma Provided, That they meet the requirements in Section 
1(b).

SECTION 2. The Modoc Tribal Council shall have the power to prescribe 
rules and regulations governing future membership, including adoptions, loss 
of membership and/or relinquishment.

SECTION 3. Any person who has been rejected for membership may file or 
have filed in his/her behalf an appeal to the Modoc Tribal Council whose 
decision shall be final.

SECTION 4. The Modoc Elected Council shall serve as the Enrollment 
Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MODOC TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION 1. 
Modoc Tribe who are at least eighteen (18) years of age or older.

The Tribal Council shall consist of all enrolled markers of the 

SECTION 2. 
reserved to it by this constitution.

The Tribal Council shall exercise those specific powers 
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MODOC EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT 

 
 SECTION 1. The representative governing body of the Modoc Tribe shall be 
the Modoc Elected Council. The Elected Council shall consist of a Chief, 
Second Chief, Secretary/Treasurer, and two (2) Council Members elected by 
secret ballot of the Tribal Council.

SECTION 2. The term of office for the Modoc Elected Council shall be for a 
period of four (4) years or until a successor is duly elected and installed 
in office.

SECTICK 3. Any member of the Modoc Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or 
older on the date of election shall be eligible to run for and serve on the 
Modoc Elected Council, Provided, That, any member who has previously been 
convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction or who is 
delinquently indebted to the Modoc Tribe shall not serve on the Modoc 
Elected Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - EXECUTIVE POWER

 
 SECTION 1. The Modoc Elected Council is empowered by the Modoc Tribal 
Council to represent the Modoc Tribe in all official matters pertaining to 
tribal business in accordance with this constitution and shall exercise all 
powers of the tribe not reserved to the Tribal Council.

SECTION 2. The Modoc Elected Council shall have the power to appoint 
 subordinate committees and representatives, enact resolutions and ordinances 
and to employ legal counsel. The choice of counsel and fixing of fees is 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized 
representative, so long as such approval is required by Federal law.

SECTION 3. The Modoc Elected Council has no authority to sell any tribally 
owned land.

SECTICK 4. The exercise of the aforementioned powers shall be subject to 
any limitations imposed by Federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - EXECUTIVE DOTIES

 
 SECTION 1. The Chief shall serve as executive officer and spokesman for 
the Modoc Tribe and perform such other duties as the Modoc Elected Council 
may prescribe by appropriate tribal resolution or ordinance.

SECTION 2. The Second Chief shall assure all duties and responsibilities 
of the Chief if the Chief dies, resigns or is removed from office.

SECTION 3. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be responsible for recording the 
proceedings of all meetings of the Modoc Tribal Council and the Modoc 
Elected Council. He/She shall notify all committees of appointment, make 
out the order of business for the Chief, and shall have custody of the 
records and all papers of the Modoc Tribal Council and the Modoc Elected 
Council. All official records of the Secretary/Treasurer shall be open to 
inspection during normal working hours by members of the Modoc Tribal 

council and/or the Modoc Elected Council at their request in his/her 
presence. In the event a member is refused access to such records, the 
member may request the Judicial Department to so order. Upon such order, 
the Secretary/Treasurer shall provide access to the requested records. 
These records and papers shall remain the property of the Modoc Tribe. 
He/She shall keep a correct list of all members of the Modoc Tribe, shall 
authenticate all accounts or orders, and in the absence of the Chief and 
Second Chief, shall call the meeting to order until a Chairman Pro Tea is 
selected. He/She shall render a written report at the annual meeting and at 
the expiration of term of office, and shall turn over all records and papers 
in his/her possession to the successor of the position or to the Modoc 
Elected council. He/She shall issue notice of all meetings and transact all 
general correspondence as directed by the Modoc Tribal council or the Modoc 
Elected Council. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be the custodian of all 
monies in possession of the Modoc Tribal Council and/or the Modoc Elected 
Council. He/She shall keep an accurate account of all receipts and shall 
disburse the same as directed by the appropriate action of the Modoc Tribal 
Council and/or the Modoc Elected Council. The Secretary/Treasurer shall 
keep all tribal monies entrusted in his/her care in a special account and 
all disbursements therefrom hall be made by check with dual authorized 
signatures.  He/She shall be bonded, and the cost of such bond shall be paid
from tribal monies. He/She shall have an audit of tribal monies conducted 
by a certified public accountant at least once a year or as directed by 
action of the Modoc Tribal Council or the Modoc Elected Council. The cost 
of such audit shall come from tribal funds.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. The judicial authority of the Modoc Tribe shall consist of a 
three (3) member court elected by popular vote of the Modoc Tribal council.

SECTION 2. Markers of the Judicial Department must be enrolled markers of 
the Modoc Tribe, qualified voters of the Modoc Tribal Council, and reside 
within a fifty (50) mile radius of Miami, Oklahoma, during the tenure of 
their office.

SECTION 3. Tribal Judges shall be elected for terms of three (3) years and 
shall serve until their successors are duly elected and installed. In the 
initial election, Judges shall serve terms of one (1), two (2) and three (3) 
years to be determined by lot in order to establish staggered terms.

SECTION 4. Markers of the Judicial Department shall not be a member of the 
Modoc Elected Council.

SECTION 5. On an annual basis, the three (3) Judges shall select the 
presiding judge from among their number.

SECTION 6. No person who has been convicted of a felony by a court of 
competent jurisdiction shall be eligible for a judicial office.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - PRIVILEGES, DUTIES AND POWERS 
OF THE JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. The Judicial Department shall have jurisdiction to decide 
disputes by a vote of two (2) markers on issues arising under any provision 
of this constitution or any legislation enacted by the Modoc Tribal Council 
and/or the Modoc Elected Council and such other jurisdiction as may be 
conferred upon it by the Modoc Tribal Council.

SECTION 2. Rules of procedure for the Judicial Department shall be 
prescribed by the Judicial Department within sixty (60) days of its members 
taking office and shall insure that citizens receive due process of law and 
a prompt and speedy trial. Those procedures shall be presented to the Modoc 
Elected Council which must act on those procedures within sixty (60) days 
after such presentation, otherwise, the procedures will became effective.

SECTION 3. Decisions of the Judicial Department shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 SECTION 1. The first regular election of officers under this constitution 
shall take place at the first annual meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council 
following the effective date of this constitution.

SECTION 2. Elections of the Modoc Elected Council shall take place during 
the annual meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council.

SECTION 3. All tribal elections shall be conducted in accordance with an 
election ordinance enacted by the Modoc Elected Council within six (6) 
months of adaption of this constitution and which is consistent with this 
constitution. Such ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, majority 
election, tie votes, and procedures for handling protests, resolving 
election disputes, and registration of voters. Provisions shall also be 
made for the conduct of recall, referendum and initiative elections and 
uniform procedures for submitting and validating petitions.

SECTION 4. Any member of the Modoc Tribe shall be eligible to vote, 
Provided, That member is at least eighteen (18) years of age on election day 
and is properly registered according to the election ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE X - MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. The annual Modoc Tribal Council meeting shall be held the first 
Saturday of May. Appropriate notice of time and place of all annual and 
special meetings shall be given by the Secretary/Treasurer of the Modoc 
Elected Council through communication such as radio or television at least 
ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting.

SECTION 2. Special meetings of the Modoc Tribal Council may be called 
the discretion of the Chief and shall be called by him/her upon written 
request of the majority of the Modoc Elected Council or the written request 
of ten (10) members of the Modoc Tribal Council.

SECTION 3. The regular meetings of the Modoc Elected Council shall be held 
quarterly during the first week in January, April, July and October of each 
year unless otherwise provided by resolution of the Modoc Elected Council.

SECTION 4. Special meetings of the Modoc Elected Council may be called by 
the Chief at his/her discretion and shall be called by him/her upon the 
written request of three (3) members of the Modoc Elected Council. If the 
Chief fails to call such meeting within five (5) days setting the date, time 
and place after receipt of a written request, any three (3) members of the 
Modoc Elected Council shall be empowered to call such meeting.

SECTION 5. The principal purpose of a special meeting, either of the Modoc 
Tribal Council or the Modoc Elected Council, must be stated in the call for 
the same and may include the words "and for the transaction of other 
business that may be presented." Unless these words are added to the call 
for either a Modoc Tribal Council or Modoc Elected Council special meeting, 
no business can be transacted other than that stated in the call for the 
meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - QUORUM

 
 SECTION 1. Ten (10) members of the Modoc Tribal Council shall constitute a 
quorum to conduct business.

SECTION 1. Three (3) members of the Modoc Elected Council shall constitute 
a quorum to contact business.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - VACANCIES

 
 Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled by appointment of the 
majority vote of the Modoc Elected Council until the annual meeting of the 
Modoc Tribal Council at which time a successor shall be elected to serve the 
unexpired term.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - RECALL AND REMOVAL

 
 SECTION 1.  Recall.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Any member of the Modoc Elected Council nay face recall from 
office should a petition signed by at least ten (10) members of 
the Modoc Tribal Council be filed with the Chief requesting 
such action.

The Chief, or Second Chief, should the Chief be named in the 
recall action, shall call a special meeting of the Modoc Tribal 
Council within twenty (20) days of receipt of the petition. 

The accused shall be furnished with all evidence at least ten 
(10) days prior to the special meeting and shall have the right 
to present an opposing argument.

After hearing the evidence from both sides, the Modoc Tribal 
Council, by a majority vote of those present, may recall the 
official if the vote reflects such action and declare the 
position vacant.

(e) 

No more than one (1) neater of the Modoc Elected Council shall 
face recall at any one time, and no member shall be subject to 
recall more than one time in any one term of office.

SECTION 2. 

Removal.

(a) 

(b) 

The Modoc Elected Council may initiate action to remove one of 
its neuters by calling a special meeting of the Modoc Tribal 
Council specifically for that purpose.

The Chief, or Second Chief, should the Chief be named in the 
removal action, shall call a special meeting of the Modoc 
Tribal Council within twenty (20) days.

(c) 

The accused shall be furnished with all evidence at least ten 
(10) days prior to the special meeting and shall have the right 
to present an opposing argument.

(d) After hearing the evidence presented from both sides the Modoc 
Tribal Council may remove the official firm office and declare 
the position vacant if the vote dictates such action.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - INITIATIVE PETITION

 
 The members of the Modoc Tribal Council may propose legislation by 
submitting to the Modoc Elected Council a petition signed by at least 
one-third (1/3) of the registered voters. Each page of the petition shall 
contain a description of the preposed enactment.

Within thirty (30) days from the Modoc Elected Council's receipt of a valid 
petition, the Chief shall call an election to be held in conjunction with a 
special meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council, Provided, That if an initiative 
petition is received within ninety (90) days before the annual meeting of 
the Modoc Tribal council, the initiative election shall be delayed until 
that time. A majority of those who vote shall decide the issue, Provided, 
That at least one-third (1/3) of the registered voters cast ballots on the 
proposed legislation. The decision of the voters shall be binding on the 
Modoc Tribal council and the Modoc Elected Council and shall remain in forcer 
until amended or rescinded by subsequent action by the voters or expire by 
its own terms.

ARTICLE XV — REFERENDUM

The Modoc Elected Council, by an affirmative vote of three (3) of its 
members, shall call an election to be conducted within forty-five (45) days 
of such action of the Modoc Elected Council by the Modoc Tribal council, for 
the purpose of deciding issues or questions that are either within the 
authority of the Modoc Tribal Council or those powers vested in the Modoc 
Elected Council. An affirmative vote by at least a majority of those who 
vote shall be necessary to decide the issue or question, Provided, That no 
less than one-third (1/3) of the registered voters cast ballots in that 
election. The decision of the voters shall be binding on the Modoc Tribal 
Council and the Modoc Elected Council and shall remain in force until 
amended or rescinded by subsequent action by the voters or expire by its own 
terms.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 The Modoc Tribe in exercising its powers of self-government, shall not 
taken any action which is in violation of the laws of the united states as 
the same shall exist from time to time respecting civil rights and civil 
liberties of persons. This article shall not abridge the concept of 
self-government or the obligations of the members of the Modoc Tribe to 
abide by this constitution and the ordinances, resolutions and other legally 
instituted actions of the Modoc Tribe. The protections guaranteed by the 
Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 78) shall apply to all members of 
the Modoc Tribe.
 
 

 
ARTICLE XVII - AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters 
of the Modoc Tribe voting in an election called for that purpose by the 
Secretary of the Interior. Provided, That at least thirty percent (30%) of 
those entitled to vote shall cast ballots in such election, but no amendment 
shall become effective until it has been approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior so long as such approval is required by Federal law.

Amendments to this constitution shall be preposed by a petition, signed by 
at least ten (10) members of the Modoc Tribal Council, or by a majority vote 
of the Modoc Elected Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All previous ordinances and resolutions passed by the Modoc Elected council 
or Modoc Tribal Council shall remain in full force and effect to the extent 
they are consistent with this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE

 
 If any provision of this constitution shall, in the future, be declared 
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision, or 
provisions, shall be severed and the remaining provisions shall continue in 
full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XX - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the adult members of 
the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma voting in an election called for that purpose by 
the Secretary of the Interior pursuant to Federal regulations. Provided, 
That at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters vote in such 
election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his 
approval and shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

ARTICLE XXI - CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order issued by Hazel E. Elbert
Secretary - Indian Affairs (Tribal Services), on FEB 13 1990(date), 

 Deputy to the Assistant 

the Constitution of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma was submitted to the 
qualified voters of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma and was on July 9, 1990 
(date), duly adopted/by a vote of 16 (number) for, and 1 
(number) against, and 0 (number) cast ballots found separated or 
mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of 
the 35 (number) entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with 
Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 
1967).

Date: 

July 9, 1990
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

CAROL A BACON

 
 I, _______________________ , Deputy to the Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs 
(Tribal Services), by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the 
Interior by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), as amended, and 
delegated to me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve the Constitution of the 
Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma, Provided, That nothing contained in this approval 
shall be construed as authorizing any action under this constitution that 
would be contrary to Federal law.

Deputy to the Assistant Secretary - 
Indian Affairs (Tribal Services)

Washington, D. C.

Date:

JUL 27 1990

