 
  
 CONSTITUTION  
 
OF THE
MODOC TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma, in order to establish a tribal organization, 
maintain the traditions of the Modoc Tribe, promote the general welfare and exercise the 
powers or self-government, do hereby ordain and establish this constitution for the Modoc 
Tribe pursuant to the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 2.6, 1936, (49 Stat. 1967) and 
Section 2 of the Act of May 25, 1978, (92 Stat. 246).
 
 

ARTICLE I  - DEFINITION OF TERMS

 
 SECTION 1. The Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma shall be the name of this tribe and shall be 
composed of all persons who qualify for membership pursuant to Article II of this 
constitution. The words "Modoc Tribe" as used in this constitution shall have the same 
meaning as "The Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma."

SECTION 2. The Modoc Tribal Council shall be the governing body of the Modoc Tribe and 
shall consist of all enrolled members of the tribe who are at least eighteen (18) years of age 
and over.

SECTION 3. The Modoc Elected Council shall be a five (5) member representative duly 
elected by the Modoc Tribal Council empowered to act on behalf of the Modoc Tribe on 
those matters set forth in this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. The membership of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma shall consist of the following 
persons, Provided, That they are citizens of the United States:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

All persons named on the 1878 Modoc Census of Subsistence and Ration as 
approved by the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs on October 
14, 1981. All persons named on that roll are hereby declared to be fullblood 
members of the tribe for the purpose of computing the degree of blood of their 
descendants.

All direct lineal descendants of persons named on the 1878 Census designated
as the base roll in Section 1(a) above who did not return to Klamath, Oregon, 
pursuant to the Act of March 9, 1909, (35 Stat. 751), and the descendants of 
such Indians who otherwise meet the requirements adopted by the tribe.

For purposes of identification and association, those individuals listed on the 
final roll of the members of the Klamath Tribe of Indians as published in the 
Federal Register of May 13, 1955 (20 F.R. 3269), pursuant to Section 3 of the 
Act of August 13, 1954, (68 Stat. 718) shall be deemed members of the 
 
 

 
 
 Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma Provided, That they meet the requirements in 
Section 1 (b).

(d) 

Upon the approval of this amendment, persons, not already on the Modoc 
Roll, that arc enrolled with another Federally Recognized Tribe shall be 
ineligible for membership in the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma. This Section 
shall be interpreted to prohibit dual tribal enrollment and membership 
transfers1.

SECTION 2. The Modoc Tribal Council shall have the power to prescribe rules and 
regulations governing future membership, including adoptions, loss of membership and/or 
relinquishment.

SECTION 3. Any person who has been rejected for membership may file or have filed in 
his/her behalf an appeal to the Modoc Tribal Council whose decision shall be final.

SECTION 4. The Modoc Elected Council shall serve as the Enrollment Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MODOC TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 SECTION I. The Tribal Council shall consist of all enrolled members of the Modoc Tribe 
who are at least eighteen (18) years of age or older.

SECTION 2. The Tribal Council shall exercise those specific powers reserved to it by this 
constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MODOC EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. The representative governing body of the Modoc Tribe shall be the Modoc 
Elected Council. The Elected Council shall consist of a Chief, Second Chief, 
Secretary/Treasurer, and two (2) Council Members elected by secret ballot of the Tribal 
Council.

SECTION 2. The term of office for the Modoc Elected Council shall be for a period of four 
(4) years or until a successor is duly elected and installed in office.

SECTION 3. Any member of the Modoc Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or older on the date 
of election shall be eligible to run for and serve on the Modoc Elected Council, Provided, 
That, any member who has previously been convicted of a felony by a court of competent 
jurisdiction or who is delinquently indebted to the Modoc Tribe shall not serve on the Modoc 
Elected Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - EXECUTIVE POWER

 
 SECTION 1. The Modoc Elected Council is empowered by the Modoc Tribal Council to 
represent the Modoc Tribe in all official matters pertaining to tribal business in accordance

1 Article II, Section D added by Secretarial Election held March 20, 2007. Amendment number 5.

with this constitution and shall exercise all powers of the tribe not reserved to the Tribal 
Council.

SECTION 2.  The Modoc Elected Council shall have the power to appoint subordinate 
committees and representatives, enact resolutions and ordinances and to employ legal 
counsel.2

SECTION 3. The Modoc Elected Council has no authority to sell Tribal Trust land.3

SECTION 4.  The exercise of the aforementioned powers shall be subject to any limitations 
imposed by Federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - EXECUTIVE DUTIES

 
 SECTION 1. The Chief shall serve as executive officer and spokesman for the Modoc Tribe 
and perform such other duties as the Modoc Elected Council may prescribe by appropriate 
tribal resolution or ordinance.

SECTION 2. The Second Chief shall assume all duties and responsibilities of the Chief if the 
Chief dies, resigns or is removed from office.

SECTION 3. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be responsible for recording the proceedings of all 
meetings of the Modoc Tribal Council and the Modoc Elected Council. He/She shall notify 
ail committees of appointment, make out the order of business for the Chief, and shall have 
custody of the records and all papers of the Modoc Tribal Council and the Modoc Elected 
Council. All official records of the Secretary/Treasurer shall be open to inspection during 
normal working hours by members of the Modoc Tribal Council and/or the Modoc Elected 
Council at their request in his/her presence. In the event a member is refused access to such 
records, the member may request the Judicial Department to so order. Upon such order, the 
Secretary/Treasurer shall provide access to the requested records. These records and papers 
shall remain the property of the Modoc Tribe. He/She shall keep a correct list of all members 
of the Modoc Tribe, shall authenticate all accounts or orders, and in the absence of the Chief 
and Second Chief, shall call the meeting to order until a Chairman Pro Tem is selected. 
He/She shall render a written report at the annual meeting and at the expiration of term of 
office, and shall turn over all records and papers in his/her possession to the successor of the 
position or to the Modoc Elected Council. He/She shall issue notice of all meetings and 
transact all general correspondence as directed by the Modoc Tribal Council or the Modoc 
Elected Council. The Secretary/Treasurer shall be the custodian of all monies in possession 
of the Modoc Tribal Council and/or the Modoc Elected Council. He/She shall keep an 
accurate account of all receipts and shall disburse the same as directed by the appropriate 
action of the Modoc Tribal Council and/or the Modoc Elected Council. The 
Secretary/Treasurer shall keep all tribal monies entrusted in his/her care in a special account 
and all disbursements therefrom shall be made by check with dual authorized signatures. 
He/She shall be bonded, and the cost of such bond shall be paid from tribal monies. He/She 
shall have an audit of tribal monies conducted by a certified public accountant at least once a

2 Article V, Section 2 amended by Secretarial Election held March 20, 2007. Amendment number 6. 
3 Article V, Section 3 amended by Secretarial Election held March 20, 2007. Amendment number 7.

year or as directed by action of the Modoc Tribal Council or the Modoc Elected Council. The 
cost of such audit shall come from tribal funds.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. The Judicial authority of the Modoc Tribe shall consist of a one (1) member 
court elected by popular vote of the Modoc Tribal Council.

SECTION 2. The Tribal Judge must be an enrolled member of the Modoc Tribe, a qualified 
voter of the Modoc Tribal Council, and reside within a fifty (50) mile radius of Miami, 
Oklahoma during the tenure of office.

SECTION 3. The Tribal Judge shall be elected for a term of four (4) years and shall serve 
until the successor is duly elected and installed. The initial election of a Tribal Judge shall 
take place within ninety (90) days of approval of these constitutional amendments. The term 
of office shall expire in conjunction with Article IX - Elections, of the constitution.

SECTION 4. The Tribal Judge shall not be a member of the Modoc Elected Council.

SECTION 5.  No person who has been convicted of a felony by a court of competent 
Jurisdiction shall be eligible for a Judicial office.4
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - PRIVILEGES, DUTIES AND POWERS 
OF THE JUDICIAL DEPARTMENT

 
 SECTION 1. The Judicial Department shall have Jurisdiction to decide disputes on issues 
arising under any provision of this constitution or any legislation enacted by the Modoc Tribal 
Council and/or the Modoc Elected Council and such other Jurisdiction as may be conferred 
upon it by the Modoc Tribal Council.

SECTION 2. Rules of procedure for the Judicial Department shall be prescribed by the 
Judicial Department within sixty (60) days of its member taking office and shall insure that 
citizens receive due process of law and a prompt and speedy trial. Those procedures shall be 
presented to the Modoc Elected Council which must act on those procedures within sixty (60) 
days after such presentation, otherwise, the procedures will become effective.

SECTION 3. Decisions of the Judicial Department shall be final.5
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - ELECTIONS

 
 SECTION 1. The first regular election of officers under this constitution shall take place at 
the first annual meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council following the effective date of this 
constitution.

4 Article VII amended by Secretarial Election held March 26, 1997. Amendment number 1.
5 Article VIII amended by Secretarial Election held March 26, 1997. Amendment number 2.

SECTION 2. Elections of the Modoc Elected Council shall take place during the annual 
meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council.

SECTION 3. All tribal elections shall be conducted in accordance with an election ordinance 
enacted by the Modoc Elected Council within six (6) months of adoption of this constitution 
and which is consistent with this constitution. Such ordinance shall provide for secret 
balloting, majority election, tie votes, and procedures for handling protests, resolving election 
disputes, and registration of voters. Provisions shall also be made for the conduct of recall, 
referendum and initiative elections and uniform procedures for submitting and validating 
petitions.

SECTION 4. Any member of the Modoc Tribe shall be eligible to vote, Provided, That 
member is at least eighteen (18) years of age on election day and is properly registered 
according to the election ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. The annual Modoc Tribal Council meeting shall be held the first Saturday of 
May. Appropriate notice of time and place of all annual and special meetings shall be given 
by the Secretary/Treasurer of the Modoc Elected Council through communication such as 
radio or television at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting.

SECTION 2. Special meetings of the Modoc Tribal Council may be called at the discretion of 
the Chief and shall be called by him/her upon written request of the majority of the Modoc 
Elected Council or the written request of ten (10) members of the Modoc Tribal Council.

SECTION 3. The regular meetings of the Modoc Elected Council shall be held quarterly 
during the first week in January, April, July and October of each year unless otherwise 
provided by resolution of the Modoc Elected Council.

SECTION 4. Special meetings of the Modoc Elected Council may be called by the Chief at 
his/her discretion and shall be called by him/her upon the written request of three (3) 
members of the Modoc Elected Council. If the Chief fails to call such meeting within five (5) 
days setting the date, time and place after receipt of a written request, any three (3) members 
of the Modoc Elected Council shall be empowered to call such meeting.

SECTION 5. The principal purpose of a special meeting, either of the Modoc Tribal Council 
or the Modoc Elected Council, must be stated in the call for the same and may include the 
words "and for the transaction of other business that may be presented." Unless these words 
are added to the cal! for either a Modoc Tribal Council or Modoc Elected Council special 
meeting, no business can be transacted other than that stated in the call for the meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - QUORUM

 
 SECTION 1. Ten (10) members of the Modoc Tribal Council shall constitute a quorum to 
conduct business.

SECTION 2. Three (3) members of the Modoc Elected Council shall constitute a quorum to 
conduct business
 
 

ARTICLE XII - VACANCIES

 
 Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled by appointment of the majority vote of the 
Modoc Elected Council until the annual meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council at which time a 
successor shall be elected to serve the unexpired term.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - RECALL AND REMOVAL

 
 SECTION 1.  Recall.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

Any member of the Modoc Elected Council or the Modoc Tribal Judge may 
face recall from office should a petition signed by at least ten (10) members of 
the Modoc Tribal Council be filed with the Chief requesting such action.7

The Chief, or Second Chief, should the Chief be named in the recall action, 
shall call a special meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council within twenty (20) 
days of receipt of the petition.

The accused shall be furnished with all evidence at least ten (10) days prior to 
the special meeting and shall have the right to present an opposing argument.

After hearing the evidence from both sides, the Modoc Tribal Council, by a 
majority vote of those present, may recall the official if the vote reflects such 
action and declare the position vacant.

No more than one (1) member of the Modoc Elected Council shall face recall 
at any one time, and no member shall be subject to recall more than one time 
in any one term of office.

SECTION 2.  Removal.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

The Modoc Elected Council may initiate action to remove one of its members 
by calling a special meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council specifically for that 
purpose.

The Chief, or Second Chief, should the Chief be named in the removal action, 
shall call a special meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council within twenty (20) 
days.

The accused shall be furnished with all evidence at least ten (10) days prior to 
the special meeting and shall have the right to present an opposing argument.

6 Article XI amended by Secretarial Election held March 26, 1997. Amendment number 4.
7 Article XIII amended by Secretarial Election held March 26, 1997. Amendment number 3.

(d) 

After hearing the evidence presented from both sides the Modoc Tribal 
Council may remove the official from office and declare the position vacant if 
the vote dictates such action.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - INITIATIVE PETITION

 
 The members of the Modoc Tribal Council may propose legislation by submitting to the 
Modoc Elected Council a petition signed by at least one-third (1/3) of the registered voters. 
Each page of the petition shall contain a description of the proposed enactment.

Within thirty (30) days from the Modoc Elected Council’s receipt of a valid petition, the Chief 
shall call an election to be held in conjunction with a special meeting of the Modoc Tribal 
Council, Provided, That if an initiative petition is received within ninety (90) days before the 
annual meeting of the Modoc Tribal Council, the initiative election shall be delayed until that 
time. A majority of those who vote shall decide the issue, Provided, That at least one-third 
(1/3) of the registered voters cast ballots on the proposed legislation. The decision of the 
voters shall be binding on the Modoc Tribal Council and the Modoc Elected Council and 
shall remain in force until amended or rescinded by subsequent action by the voters or expire 
by its own terms.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - REFERENDUM

 
 The Modoc Elected Council, by an affirmative vote of three (3) of its members, shall call an 
election to be conducted within forty-five (45) days of such action of the Modoc Elected 
Council by the Modoc Tribal Council, for the purpose of deciding issues or questions that are 
either within the authority of the Modoc Tribal Council or those powers vested in the Modoc 
Elected Council. An affirmative vote by at least a majority of those who vote shall be 
necessary to decide the issue or question, Provided, That no less than one-third (1/3) of the 
registered voters cast ballots in that election. The decision of the voters shall be binding on 
the Modoc Tribal Council and the Modoc Elected Council and shall remain in force until 
amended or rescinded by subsequent action by the voters or expire by its own terms.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 The Modoc Tribe, in exercising its powers of self-government, shall not take any action 
which is in violation of the laws of the United States as the same shall exist from time to time 
respecting civil rights and civil liberties of persons. This article shall not abridge the concept 
of self-government or the obligations of the members of the Modoc Tribe to abide by this 
constitution and the ordinances, resolutions and other legally instituted actions of the Modoc 
Tribe. The protections guaranteed by the Indian Civil Rights Act of 196S (82 Stat. 78) shall 
apply to all members of the Modoc Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII- AMENDMENTS

 
 This constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Modoc 
Tribe voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, Provided, 
That at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall cast ballots m such election.8

8 Article XVII amended by Secretarial Election heid March 20, 2007, Amendment number 8.

Amendments to this constitution shall be proposed by a petition, signed by at least ten (10) 
members of the Modoc Tribal Council, or by a majority vote of the Modoc Elected Council,
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII- SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All previous ordinances and resolutions passed by the Modoc Elected Council or Modoc 
Tribal Council shall remain in full force and effect to the extent they are consistent with this 
constitution,
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - SEVERABILITY CLAUSE

 
 If any provision of this constitution shall, in the future, be declared invalid by a court of 
competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision, or provisions, shall be severed and the 
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XX - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the adult members of the Modoc Tribe 
of Oklahoma voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior 
pursuant to Federal regulations, Provided, That at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified 
voters vote in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval 
and shall be effective from the date of such approval.

United States Department of the Interior
 
  
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 Miami Agency
Post Office Box 391
Miami, Oklahoma 74355 
 

IN REPLY REFER TO


APR 2 0 2007

Tribal Government Services

To:

From:

Regional Director, Eastern Oklahoma Region

Acting Superintendent, Miami Agency

Subject:

Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma Secretarial Election

On March 20, 2007, a Secretarial Election was held to allow the registered voters of the Modoc 
Tribe of Oklahoma (Tribe) to vote on four proposed amendments to the Tribe’s Constitution as 
authorized by memorandum dated November 3, 2006. Thirty-seven eligible Tribal members 
registered to vote and twenty-six voted in an all absentee ballot election which fulfilled the 
requirement of 30 percent required by 25 CFR, Part 81.7, and Article XVII of the Tribe’s 
Constitution. All four proposed amendments were adopted. The time period for contesting the 
results of the election expired on Friday, March 23, 2007, with no challenges being filed; 
therefore pursuant to 25 CFR, Part 81.24, the following documents are being provided:

Original text of material voted on (Ballots),
Original copy of Instruction for Filing Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma Absentee 
Ballots; and,
Original Certificate of Results of Election

If additional information is required, contact Mary Moss, Agency Tribal Relations Specialist, 
(918) 542-3396.
 
 

 
 
 
OFFICIAL BALLOT

CHAIRMAN, ELECTION BOARD

MODOC TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA 
ABSENTEE BALLOT
 
 Tuesday, March 20, 2007

SHOULD ARTICLE II BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS?
 
 

PROPOSED AMENDMENT (A)

 
 Article II - TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP

SECTION 1(d), Add “Upon the approval of this amendment, persons, not already on 
the Modoc Roll, that are enrolled with another Federally 
Recognized Tribe shall be ineligible for membership in the Modoc 
Tribe of Oklahoma. This Section shall be interpreted to prohibit 
dual tribal enrollment and membership transfers."

YES, I vote to approve the amendment 

 NO, I vote to reject the amendment
 
 

OFFICIAL BALLOT

CHAIRMAN, ELECTION BOARD

MODOC TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA 
ABSENTEE BALLOT 
 
 Tuesday, March 20, 2007

SHOULD ARTICLE V BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS?
 
 

PROPOSED AMENDMENT (B)

ARTICLE V - EXECUTIVE POWER

 
 SECTION 2, Delete “The choice of counsel and fixing of fees is subject to the approval 

of the Secretary of the Interior, or his authorized representative, 
so long as such approval is required by Federal law.”

YES, I vote to approve the amendment

NO, I vote to reject the amendment
 
 

OFFICIAL BALLOT

CHAIRMAN, ELECTION BOARD

MODOC TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA 
ABSENTEE BALLOT
 
 Tuesday, March 20, 2007

SHOULD ARTICLE V BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS?
 
 

PROPOSED AMENDMENT (C)

ARTICLE V - EXECUTIVE POWER

 
 SECTION 3. Change to “The Modoc Elected Council has no authority to sell tribal trust 

land.”

 YES, I vote to approve the amendment

 NO, I vote to reject the amendment
 
 

OFFICIAL BALLOT

CHAIRMAN, ELECTION BOARD

MODOC TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA 
ABSENTEE BALLOT 
 
 Tuesday, March 20, 2007

SHOULD ARTICLE XVII BE AMENDED AS FOLLOWS?
 
 

PROPOSED AMENDMENT (D)

ARTICLE XVII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Add "." after "such election” and delete ", but no amendment shall become 
effective until it has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior so long as 
such approval is required by Federal law.”

YES, I vote to approve the amendment

NO, I vote to reject the amendment

All typographical errors in the previously approved constitution have been 
corrected pursuant to the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma Resolution # 06-18 “2006 
Constitutional Amendments Affirmation” mailed to you with the Election 
Notice on January 24, 2007.

United States Department of the Interior
 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS
 
 Miami Agency
Post Office Box 391
Miami. Oklahoma 74355

IN REPLY REFER TO:

February 23, 2007 
 
 

INSTRUCTIONS
FOR FILING MODOC TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA
ABSENTEE BALLOTS

 
 Dear Tribal Voter:

Enclosed you will find an Absentee Ballot for voting on the proposed amendments to the Modoc 
Tribe of Oklahoma Constitution that the Bureau of Indian Affairs, Eastern Oklahoma Region, 
Miami Agency Election Board mailed to you on Wednesday, January 24, 2007. Please use this 
ballot to vote in the Secretarial Election to ratify or reject the proposed amendments to the 
Constitution. The election will be held on Tuesday, March 20, 2007. All voting on the 
proposed Constitution will be done by Absentee ballot. To cast your vote, please follow these 
instructions.

1.  Read each proposed amendment and place an “X” in the “Yes” box if you 

want the proposed amendment approved.

2.  If you do not want the proposed amendment approved, place an “X” in the 

“No” box.

3.  After placing your “X” in the box of your choice, fold the ballots to conceal 
the markings and seal it in the envelope marked “Absentee Ballot”. No 
stamp, name, or address is needed on this envelope.

4.  Place the sealed envelope marked “Absentee Ballot” into the outer envelope 

and seal it. No stamp is needed on the self addressed outer envelope.

5.  Complete the certificate on the back of the envelope; sign your name and mail 
the envelope. Sign the certification with your name as documented on the 
addressed envelope as this must match the name you registered for voting in 
this election. This envelope will be separated from the small envelope 
containing the ballot before the counting begins to ensure confidentiality of 
your vote. The statement on the back of the envelope must be signed or it 
will be considered a spoiled ballot and will not be counted in the voting 
process.

6.  If you sign by “X” or thumbprint, it must be witnessed by two (2) people.
7.  Mail the pre-addressed envelope within sufficient time to allow receipt by the 
Election Board by 12:00 p.m. noon (CST) Tuesday, March 20, 2007. Ballots 
received after that time will not be counted.

Respectfully,
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial Election authorized by the Eastern Oklahoma Regional Director 
on November 3, 2006, delegated to the Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by the Act of 
June 26, 1936 (49) Stat. 1967, redelegated to the Regional Director by 130 D.M. and 
Bureau of Indian Affairs Policy Memorandum dated October 11, 2006, the attached 
Constitution Amendments of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma were submitted to the 
qualified voters of the Tribe on March 20, 2007. Proposed Amendment (A) was duly 
ratified by a vote of 23 for and 2 against, and 1 cast ballots found 
soiled or mutilated. Proposed Amendment (B) was duly ratified by a vote of 
24 for and 1 against, and 1 cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated. Proposed
Amendment (C) was duly ratified by a vote of 25 for and 1 against, and

0 cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated. Proposed Amendment (D) was duly 

ratified by a vote of 26 for and 0 against, and 0 cast ballots found 
spoiled or mutilated. At least thirty (30) percent of the 37 members entitled to 
vote, cast their ballot in accordance with the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 
1937, and Article XVII of the Tribe’s Constitution.

March 20, 2007
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial Election authorized by the Eastern Oklahoma Regional Director 
on November 3, 2006, delegated to the Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, by the Act of 
June 26, 1936 (49) Stat. 1967, redelegated to the Regional Director by 130 D.M. and 
Bureau of Indian Affairs Policy Memorandum dated October 11, 2006, the attached 
Constitution Amendments of the Modoc Tribe of Oklahoma were submitted to the 
qualified voters of the Tribe on March 20, 2007. Proposed Amendment (A) was duly 
ratified by a vote of 23 for and 2 against, and 1 cast ballots found 
soiled or mutilated. Proposed Amendment (B) was duly ratified by a vote of 
24_for and 1 against, and 1 ballots found spoiled or mutilated. Proposed 
Amendment (C) was duly ratified by a vote of 25 for and 1_ against, and

0 cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated. Proposed Amendment (D) was duly 

ratified by a vote of 26 for and 0 against, and 0 cast ballots found 
spoiled or mutilated. At least thirty (30) percent of the 37 members entitled to 
vote, cast their ballot in accordance with the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 
1937, and Article XVII of the Tribe’s Constitution.

March 20, 2007

