 
  
 BYLAWS OF MOORETOWN RANCHERIA 
 

ARTICLE I 
PRINCIPAL OFFICE

 
 The principal office for the transaction of business of the Mooretown Rancheria is 
hereby located at: 1900 Oro Dam Boulevard, Suite No. 8, Oroville, California 95965.
County of Butte, California, The Tribal Council is hereby granted full power and 
authority to change the principal office from this location to another location within
Butte County.
 
 

ARTICLE II 
MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Qualifications of Members

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

Eligibility of voting: All enrolled members of Mooretown Rancheria 
twenty-one (21) years of age or older and of Maidu descent, other than 
members adopted into the Tribe, regardless of residence, are qualified 
voters. Persons adopted into the Tribe who are not lineal descendents of 
original distributees or dependent members shall not have the right to vote 
in tribal elections or hold office.

Special membership meetings may be called at the discretion of the Tribal 
Council. Special meetings of the General Membership may be called by the 
Chairperson and shall be called by him/her upon receipt of a petition 
signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the General Membership.

Notice of membership meetings shall be mailed to each member of the
 Mooretown Rancheria at least seven (7) days in advance and be specific as 
to date, time, place and address. In addition, notice of meetings shall be 
published through posters, media, etc,, within the discretion of the Tribal 
Council. 

A quorum necessary to conduct official business of the Mooretown 
Rancheria shall be a simple majority of the existing membership of the 
Tribal Council, not the total members of the Mooretown Rancheria

The latest edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall govern all membership 
meetings, except as otherwise specified in these Bylaws.

No person who is now, or later becomes a member of the Mooretown 
Rancheria shall be personally liable for any debts incurred by the 
Mooretown Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE III 
TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Tribal Council

1. 

2. 

The governing board of the Mooretown Rancheria shall be the Tribal 
Council.

Qualifications of Council Members: All candidates for the Tribal Council 
must be qualified voters of the Mooretown Rancheria, twenty-one (21) 
years of age or older, who reside within the State of California. No person 
who has been convicted of a felony within three (3) years preceding the 
election shall be eligible to hold office on the Mooretown Rancheria Tribal 
Council.

3. 

Number of Members: The Tribal Council shall consist of four officers, and 
three other members. In addition, there shall be three alternate members.

Section 2. Powers of the Tribal Council

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

7. 

The Tribal Council shall hire an Administrator responsible for the operation 
except as otherwise specified in these Bylaws.

The Tribal Council shall have the power to hire and dismiss the 
Administrator. The Administrator serves at the pleasure of the Council. 
An Administrator must reside in Butte County.

The Tribal Council retains full authority to uphold or reverse decisions of 
any Committee of the Council.

Any action taken by simple majority of the Council at a meeting shall be 
the action of the Council.

All powers shall be exercised by or under the authority of the Tribal 
Council subject to the limitations of these Bylaws and applicable law.

No salary is given to the Tribal Council, but per diem and/or travel for 
corporate business is given upon adequate documentation, i.e., receipts, etc.

Alternate Council Members shall attend Council meetings to substitute for 
an absent member when a quorum is needed,

Section 5.  Removal of a Member of the TribalCouncil

1. 

2. 

3. 

A Council Member who is absent without a valid excuse from three 
consecutive Tribal Council meetings may be removed from office by a 
majority of the Tribal Council.

A Council Member may be removed from the Council for cause by four (4) 
members of the Council.

Tribal Council Members serve at the pleasure of the membership and may 
be removed by a twenty-five percent (25%) vote of the qualified voters of 
the Mooretown Rancheria. Any member of the Tribal Council of the 
Mooretown Rancheria who, during the term for which he/she is elected or 
appointed, is convicted of a felony in any federal or state court shall 
automatically forfeit his/her office effective on the date of his/her initial 
conviction in court. Any member of the Tribal Council found guilty by the 
Tribal Council of behavior involving misconduct reflecting on the dignity 
and integrity of the Tribal government, malfeasance in office, or gross 
neglect of duty shall be removed from office if at least four (4) members of 
the Tribal Council vote in favor of such removal. Voting must be by secret 
ballot and the Chairperson is entitled to vote. The accused shall not have 
the right to cast a secret ballot. Before any vote for removal is taken, such 
member shall be given a written statement of the charges against him at 
least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Tribal Council which he/she is 
to appear and he/she shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all 
charges at the designated Council meeting. The decision of the Tribal 
Council shall be final. No member of the Tribal Council shall preside over 
the meeting at which his/her removal is being considered.

Section 6, 

Conflict of Interest

1. 

On any motion before the Tribal Council to approve, review or comment on 
a proposal for funds for the benefit of any institution or agency a Council 
Member shall abstain from voting if such Council Member

a.  has a financial interest in the institution or agency, or

b.  has a financial interest in the proposal, or

c. 

is employed by a firm or company which has financial interest in the 
proposal, or regularly provides professional service to the institution or 
agency.

Such individual will be permitted to discuss the matter before the Council 

if the conflict of interest is revealed by the individual prior to the 
discussion.

Section_7.___ Acceptance of Gifts and Gratuities

1. 

It shall be the policy of this Rancheria to prohibit the acceptance of gifts, 
money, and gratuities by Board Members, policymaking bodies, employees, 
contracting agencies and members of their immediate family from

a.  any persons or agency performing services under contract, 

or

b.  persons who arc otherwise in a position to benefit from the actions of 

any employee or Council Member.

Section 8.____ Vacancies

In the event of a vacancy, a majority of the Council Members shall appoint a 
member of the Mooretown Rancheria to fill that position at its next meeting.

Section 9. Records

At the expiration of his/her term of office, the Council Member shall turn over all 
records and papers in his/her possession to the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV 
OFFICERS

 
 Section 1.____ Officers

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

1. 

The Officers of the Tribal Council shall be; Chairman, Vice-Chairman, 
Secretary and Treasurer.

Officers shall serve terms of two (2) calendar years.

All Officers shall be members of the Tribal Council.

Officers shall be voting members of the Tribal Council.

Duties of Officers;

The Chairperson shall be the principal Executive Officer of the Mooretown 
Rancheria and shall be, in general, subject to the control of the Tribal 
Council, supervise and control the affairs of the Rancheria. The Chairperson 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 

shall be the principal liaison between the Tribal Council and governmental 
agencies, the general public, and the Administration of the Staff, and shall 
supervise and direct the activities of the Administrator in accordance with 
such policies, resolutions and directives as the Tribal Council may adopt 
from time to time.

The Chairperson shall preside at the membership and Council's meetings 
and have such other powers and duties, as may be prescribed from time to 
time by the Tribal Council.

The Vice-Chairperson shall perform all the duties of the Chairperson in his 
absence and other duties as shall be prescribed from time to time by the 
Chairperson or the Tribal Council, by these Bylaws or by applicable law.

In the absence of the Chairperson, or in the event of the Chairperson's 
inability or refusal to act, the Vice-Chairperson shall perform all the duties 
of the Chairperson, and when so acting, shall have all the powers of and be 
subject to all the restrictions of the Chairperson.

The Secretary or his/her designee shall keep a record of the proceedings of 
all meetings and perform such other duties as may be prescribed by the 
Tribal Council or Chairperson.

The Treasurer or his/her designee shall collect and receive all monies and 
funds for the Mooretown Rancheria and deposit them in the bank 
designated by the Tribal Council. The Treasurer or his/her designee shall 
present financial statements to the Tribal Council when requested or as 
required by the Bylaws; exhibit at all reasonable times the books of 
accounts and financial records to any Tribal Member of the Mooretown 
Rancheria, or to his/her attorneys on request thereof and render to the 
Chairperson and Council Members, whenever he/she requests it, an account 
of any or all transactions of his office as Treasurer and of the financial 
condition of the Mooretown Rancheria.

Section_2.__Election_of_Officers

1. 

Each Tribal Council Member shall be elected for a term of two (2) years. 
Terms of office for the seven (7) Council Members shall be staggered. The 
initial election shall be conducted so that the Chairperson, Secretary and 
Treasurer are elected for a term of one (1) year. Persons who are 
members of the Tribal Council at the time this Constitution is adopted and 
approved shall continue to serve on the Tribal Council until the regular 
annual elections for their respective offices. Elected officials shall hold and 
remain in office until their successors are duly elected and installed.

Installation shall be made at the next duly called regular Tribal Council 
meeting following their election.

a. Appointment of Officers:

The Tribal Council, at their discretion, may appoint such other Officers as 
the business of the Rancheria may require.

Section 3. Removal of Officers

1. 

An Officer may be removed from office for cause by a twenty-five percent 
(25%) vote of the general membership. Any member of the Tribal Council 
of the Mooretown Rancheria who, during the term for which he/she is 
elected or appointed, is convicted of a felony in any federal or state court 
shall automatically forfeit his/her office effective on the date of his/her 
initial conviction in court. Any member of the Tribal Council found guilty 
by the Tribal Council of behavior involving misconduct reflecting on the 
dignity and integrity of the tribal government, malfeasance in office, or 
gross neglect of duty shall be removed from office if at least four (4) 
members of the Tribal Council vote in favor of such removal. Voting must 
be by secret ballot and the Chairperson is entitled to vote. The accused 
shall have the right to cast a secret ballot. Before any vote for removal is 
taken, such member shall be given a written statement of the charges 
against him/her at least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Tribal 
Council which he/she is to appear and he/she shall be given an opportunity 
to answer any and all charges at the designated Council meeting. The 
decision of the Tribal Council shall be final. No member of the Tribal 
Council shall preside over the meeting at which his/her removal is being 
considered. 

.

a. Vacancies:

In the event of a vacancy, a majority of the Council shall appoint a 
Council member of the Mooretown Rancheria, to serve the remainder of 
the unexpired term.
 
 

ARTICLE V
STANDING COMMITTEES

 
 The Chairperson shall have the power to form Standing Committees comprised of three 
(3) Board Members to a Committee for purpose of carrying out the duties of the 
Committees.

1. 
2. 
3. 

Personnel and Grievance Committee
Bylaws and Policy Committee
Budget and Finance Committee

4. 

Enrollment Committee

Section 1.__ Personnel_and_Grievance_Committee

The Personnel and Grievance Committee shall have authority to review all matters 
related to Personnel Policies and Procedures of the Mooretown Rancheria and submit 
their findings and recommendations to the Tribal Council. The Committees shall be 
responsible for handling all grievances arising.

The Committee shall be responsible for and whose duties shall consist of screening, 
reviewing and making recommendations to amend the Bylaws and Policies that affect 
Mooretown Rancheria. Recommendations shall be taken before the Tribal Council for 
proper action.

Section 3.___Budget and Finance Committee

The Committee shall be responsible for the establishment, review and amendment of 
the fiscal policies and procedures. The Committee shall establish and review the annual 
operating budget of the Mooretown Rancheria. The Committee shall review all financial 
reports, vouchers and other fiscal matters and present their findings to the Council.

Section 4._ _ Enrollment Committee

The Enrollment Committee shall be directly responsible to the Tribal Council which may 
remove any member of the Committee at such time that it is clearly evident such 
member has neglected his or her duties. Among other duties which may be assigned, 
the Enrollment Committee shall dispense information regarding the membership 
requirements, distribute and receive applications and related forms, and review and 
recommend approval/ disapproval of membership applications.

Section 5. Committee Members

The Chairperson shall also have the power to appoint members to serve on any 
committee deemed necessary for purposes of carrying out the wishes of the Tribal 
Council.

a.  All lineal and adopted members 18 years or older shall be eligible for 

appointment to committees.

b.  Only an elected Council Member may serve as Chairperson of any committee. 
c. Adoptees serving on committees may vote only on committee matters.
 
 

ARTICLE VI 
INSPECTION OF RECORDS

 
 Section 1. Inspection of Records

The book of accounts and the minutes of all meetings of the Tribal Council and 
Committee meetings shall be kept open for inspection by Tribal members on written 
demand and at any reasonable time for a purpose reasonably relating to a specific issue. 
The inspection shall be made in person. The rights of inspection, including the right to 
make extractions from the records, shall also be made in person.

Demands for inspection must be in writing and must be made to the Chairperson, 
Secretary or Administrator. The following records are not open for inspection, except to 
the Contracting Officer or the Governmental Audit Office: Personnel and Client records.
 
 

ARTICLE VII 
NEPOTISM

 
 Section_1._Nepotism

1. 

"Immediate family member" as used in this section means husband, wife, 
brother, sister, son, daughter, father, mother, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, 
mother-in-law, father-in-law, stepchild, stepparent, grandmother, 
grandfather, grandson, or granddaughter.

2. 

No two immediate family members may serve as officers at the same time.

3. 

No officer or other member of the Tribal Council shall participate in or
attempt to influence a decision of the Tribal Council that will have a direct 
effect on an immediate family member other than a decision that affects 
the family member in the same way as all other members of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII 
 
 AMENDMENTS_TO_BYLAWS

Section 1.___ Amendment

These Bylaws may be amended, repealed, added to or new Bylaws adopted by a 
majority vote of the Tribal Council.

The original or copy of these Bylaws, as amended or otherwise altered to date, shall at 
all times be kept in the principal office or the Mooretown Rancheria for me transaction

Members when elected to the Tribal Council and thereafter upon written request. The 
Bylaws are to be reviewed on an annual basis by the Tribal Council.

Section 3.___Dissolution of the Rancheria

A. 

B. 

C. 

Upon the dissolution of the Mooretown Rancheria, its assets, after payment 
of provision for payment of all debts and liabilities, shall be distributed to 
a non-profit fund, foundation or corporation which is organized and 
operated exclusively for education, charitable and/or scientific purposes 
and which has established its tax exempt status under Section 501 (C) (3) 
of the United States Internal Revenue Code.

No part of the net earnings of this association shall ever insure to or for the 
benefit of or be distributable to its members, trustees, officers, or other 
private persons, except that the association shall be empowered to pay 
reasonable compensation for services rendered and to make payments and 
distributions in furtherance of the exempt purposes for which it was 
formed.

Notwithstanding any other provisions of these Articles, the association shall 
not carry on any other activities not permitted to be carried on by an 
association exempt from Federal Income Tax under Section 501 (C) (3) of 
the Internal Revenue Code of 1954.
 
 

ARTICLE IX 
 
 AMENDMENT_TO_THEBYLAWS 
JULY 12, 1990

Section 1.__ Tribal Elders

At a duly called and convened Tribal Council Meeting at which a quorum was noted, 
a motion was made, seconded and passed, by a vote of 6 for, 0 opposed 
and 1 abstained to add to the Bylaws of the Mooretown Rancheria:

Article IX: Section 1. Tribal Elders:

1. 

Tribal Elders of the Mooretown Rancheria will be recognized as Elders of 
the Tribe at fifty (50) years of age.
 
 

ARTICLE X
 
 AMENDMENT_TO_THE_BYLAWS
December 8. 1991

The Tribal Council hereby amends these Bylaws as follows:

At a duly called and convened meeting of the Tribal Council at which a quorum 
was present a motion was made, seconded and passed by a vote of 6 for, 0 op
posed and 0 abstained to add to the Bylaws of the Mooretown Rancheria:

Article X:_Section_l. Alternates:

1. 

The Tribal Council shall also consist of no more than seven (7) Council 
Members and three (3) Alternate Council who shall act on the Council in 
the absence of one of the original seven members, as referred to in Election 
Ordinance No, 90-03, Article IV, Section 1. The term of office for each 
Alternate Council Member shall be for a period of one (1) year.

Donald Archuleta made a motion to add three alternate council members to 
the to the Council Members. Seconded by Melvin Jackson. All in favor: 
yes, 0 against and 0 abstaining. Motion carried

(Amended-December 8,1991)

Article X:_Section_2._Adoption:

1. 

The adoption policies of the Mooretown Rancheria shall be amended to 
read as follows:

Any descendant of a "Recognized California Indian Tribe'' who has applied 
for adoption and who will help to promote and develop the Rancheria for 
all members may be adopted into membership by a vote of the Enrollment 
Committee using written ballots that guarantee the anonymity of voters 
(secret ballot). The names of the applicants for adoption shall be posted by 
the Enrollment Committee. Individuals duly adopted under the provisions 
of this section shall not become a voting member of the General Council.

The decision of the Tribal Council shall be final.

Donald Archuleta made a motion to limit future adoptees to recognized 
California Indian Tribes only. Melvin Jackson seconded the motion. All in 
favor: 6 for, 0 against and 0 abstaining. Motion carried.

(Amended - December 8, 1991)
 
 

AMENDMENTS

TO THE

CONSTITUTION

 
 Amendment to the Constitution
Tribal Council Election
April 25, 1992

Article IV, Section 1: Governing Body
Page 2

Change to:

The governing body of the Mooretown Rancheria shall be 
the Tribal Council of the Mooretown Rancheria. The Tribal 
Council shall consist of seven (7) members elected at-large from 
the Mooretown Rancheria, including four officers, a 
Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer, Three 
(3) Council Members and Three (3) Alternate Council Members.

Article XIII, Section 4: Meetings
Page 12

Chanse to:

A quorum of the General Membership shall consist of 
twenty percent (20%) of the General Membership, except at the 
initial tribal election. Action may be taken by the concurrence 
of a majority of the members present at any duly called meeting 
providing that a quorum was established at the beginning of the 
meeting.

Changes to the Constitution
Tribal Council Election
April 24, 1993

Preamble
Page 1

Change to:

We, the members of the Mooretown Rancheria, being of 
the Maidu/Concow Indian Tribe located in Butte County, the 
State of California, in order to promote our common welfare and 
to secure to ourselves and our descendants the rights, powers 
and privileges conferred by the tribe’s inherent rights of self 
government, do hereby ordain and establish this Constitution.

yes 37 

no  abstain

Article I
Page l

There is no Article I in the Constitution. The Constitution 
started with Article II instead of Article I as it should have. The 
Articles need to be renumbered and all references to the Articles 
elsewhere in this Constitution, the By-Laws, Personnel Policies 
and other documents needs to reflect those changes.

yes 35 

no  abstain

Cont. Amendment to the Constitution
Tribal Council Election
April 24, 1993

Article II, Membership: Section 3
Page 2

Change to:

The official membership roll shall be prepared in 
accordance with an ordinance adopted by the governing body. 
Such ordinance shall contain provisions for enrollment 
eligibility, enrollment procedures and requirements, enrollment 
committee, applications, rejection notice, appeals, corrections 
and provisions for keeping the roll on current basis.

yes 33 

no  abstain

Article VII, Powers of the Governing Council of Mooretown 
Rancheria: Section l(p)
Page 9

Leave As Is - To have the authority to suspend or terminate 
the services of any employee for cause. Said employee shall be 
granted the right to appeal such said Council action before a 
grievance committee.

(This is covered in the Personnel Policies, Section VIII. (c) and Section IX, (b) 2.)

yes  no 20 

abstain

Cont. Amendments to the Constitution
Tribal Council Election
April 24, 1993

Article II, Membership: Section 1(b)
Page 2

Change to:

Any other person of Indian descent determined to be 
eligible by, and who has fulfilled all requirements of, the 
Enrollment Ordinance for adoption into the tribe.

Article IX, Tribal Enactment’s: Section 4
Page 10

Change To:

No enactment of the General Membership or Tribal 
Council of the Mooretown Rancheria shall have any validity or 
effect in the absence of a quorum of the membership thereof at a 
legally called session.

yes 34 

no

abstain

Article XII, Meetings: Section I
Page 12

Change to:

Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held 
monthly in a place designated by the Tribal Council. Special 
meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the Chairperson 
and shall be called by him/her upon receipt of a petition signed 
by at least three (3) Tribal Council members and when so called,

Cont. Amendment to the Constitution
Tribal Council Election
April 24, 1993 

the Tribal Council shall have the power to transact business as in 
regular meetings provided that a quorum is present. Members of 
the Tribal Council shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) 
hours in advance of all special tribal meetings. Notice may be 
waived by unanimous consent.

yes 33 

no  abstain

Article XII, Meetings: Section 3
Page 12

Change to:

Regular meetings of the general Membership shall be held 
annually. Special meetings of the General Membership may be 
called by the Chairperson and shall be called by him/her upon 
receipt of a petition signed by at least twenty-five (25%) of the 
members of the General Membership.

yes 33

no

abstain

General Membership Meeting 
Amendment to the Constitution 
June 4, 1994

Article II, Membership: Section 1(b)
Page 2

Change to:

Any Concow/Maidu/Miwok Indians determined to be 
eligible by, and who has fulfilled all requirements of, the 
Enrollment Ordinance for adoption into the tribe.

yes 31 

no 0  

abstain 0

Article IV, Elections: Section 4
Page 4

Change to:

Each Tribal Council member shall be elected for a four (4) 

year term.

yes 15 no 11

abstain 9

General Membership Meeting 
Amendment to the Constitution 
July 9, 1994

Article XIII, Duties of Officers: Section 6(b) Nepotism
Page 15

Change to:

No two immediate family members may serve as officer or 
  Signatories (check signers) at the same time. Nepotism is for 

the purposes of check signatories only.

yes 21 no 3 abstain 0

General Membership Meeting 
Amendments to the Constitution
November 19, 1994

Article II, Membership: Section 1(b)
Page 2

Change to:

Any Concow/Maidu Indians determined to be eligible by, 
and who has fulfilled all requirements of, the Enrollment 
Ordinance for adoption into the tribe.

yes 24 

no 0  

abstain 1

Article XIII, Duties of Officers: Section 6 Nepotism 
Page 14-15

Deleting nepotism out of the Constitution.

yes 17 

no 1   

abstain 1

Out of the Meeting Minutes:

Close the membership or leave as is: Donald Archuleta 
made a motion for the adoptees may be closed for membership. 
Lee Sheldon second the motion. Discussion.

The motion has been revised to the applications to all 
adoptees to be closed for two (2) years and can be open at the 
pleasure of the membership within two (2) years by vote. 
Second stands with Lee Sheldon. Any further discussion.

yes 22 

no 0   

abstain 4    Motion Carried.

Cont. General Membership Meeting
November 19, 1994
Out of the Meeting Minutes:

General Membership needs to make a decision of who is a 
lineal and who is a lateral, because Mooretown has some lateral 
in as lineal. Their children some of them are adoptees. Needs to 
be clarified. Discussion.

Stressed that these people (laterals on lineal list) would be

included but no more would be added. Don Steidl amend the 
motion to say: only these lineal/laterals that already on the list 
as lineals would become laterals would have the voting rights 
 and closed at that point. Their descendants would not have 
 voting rights. Don Archuleta second the motion. Any further 
discussion. Call for the question. These people will continue to 
have a voting right that is on the list and will be closed as of this 
day. After this motion passes, the others would come in as 
adoptees.

yes 14 

no 0  

abstain 9    Motion Carried.

Stressed that the Constitution will have to be amended for 

the voting rights for the lineal/laterals. (See attached list)

Don Steidl made a motion to change the Constitution to 
 reflect the lateral that are listed to be eligible as voting members. 

Wallace Clark second the motion. Any further discussion.

yes 16 

no 1

abstain 3

Motion Carried.
 
 

 
 
 