 
  
 CONSTITUTION  
 
OF THE 
MOORETOWN RANCHERIA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Mooretown Rancheria, being of the Concow/Maidu Indian Tribe 
located in Butte County, the State of California, in order to promote our common welfare 
and to secure to ourselves and our descendants the rights, powers and privileges conferred 
by the Tribe's inherent rights of self-government, do hereby ordain and establish this 
constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - TERRITORY

 
 This Constitution shall apply to all lands belonging to the Mooretown Rancheria and such 
lands as may be hereafter adjudicated in favor or acquired by or for the Mooretown 
Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 The General Membership of Mooretown Rancheria shall consist of Lineal Members and 
Non-Lineal Members, provided however, that such individuals are not enrolled members 
in any other federally recognized tribe. He/She must relinquish membership and land use 
assignment on another reservation or rancheria. However, inherited interests in trust 
allotments shall not disqualify a person from membership.

SECTION 1. 

Lineal Members shall consist of the following:

(a) 

Individuals who are direct lineal descendants of Kate Archuleta, Fred Taylor, 
Robert Jackson and Ina Jackson, who were listed as distributees in the Plan for 
Distribution of the Assets of the Mooretown Rancheria as recorded in the Federal Register 
dated August 1, 1961.

(b)  Individuals who are lineal descendants of an individual, living or dead, identified 

in Section 1 above.

SECTION 2. Non-Lineal Members shall consist of the following:

(a) Any individual of Indian descent determined to be eligible by, and who has 

fulfilled all requirements of, the Enrollment Ordinance for adoption into the tribe.

SECTION 3. The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with an 
ordinance adopted by the Tribal Council. Such ordinance shall contain provisions for 
enrollment procedures and requirements, applications, rejection notice, appeals, 
corrections and provisions for keeping the roll on current basis.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - GOVERNING BODY

 
 SECTION 1. Any rights and powers which have at any time been vested or shall in 
the future be vested in the Mooretown Rancheria, but which are not expressly referred to 
in this Constitution, shall not be limited or forfeited by the fact that they are not listed here. 
Such rights and powers may be exercised by the Lineal Voting Members or delegated by it 
to the Tribal Council or other officers and agencies of the tribe without amendment of this 
Constitution. The lineal voting members exercise their powers through referendum and 
amendment and such other powers delegated to them by this Constitution.

SECTION 2. The governing body of the Mooretown Rancheria shall be the Tribal 
Council.

SECTION 3. The Tribal Council shall consist of seven (7) lineal voting members 
elected at-large from the Mooretown Rancheria Lineal Voting Membership. This includes: 
four officers, a Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer, three (3) Council 
members and Three (3) Alternate Council Members.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - ELECTIONS

 
 SECTION 1. Voter Qualification All enrolled lineal members as defined in Article II, 
who have reached the age of 21 years, regardless of residence, shall have the right to vote 
in tribal elections. These members shall be referred to as Lineal Voting Members. Persons 
adopted into the Tribe who are not lineal descendants of original distributees or dependent 
members shall not have the right to vote in tribal elections.

SECTION 2. Qualification of Candidates. All candidates for the Tribal Council must be 

qualified voters of the Mooretown Rancheria, twenty-one (21) years of age or older, who 
reside within the state of California. No person who has been convicted of a felony in any 
State or Federal Court within three (3) years preceding the election shall be eligible to hold 
office on the Mooretown Rancheria Tribal Council.

Tribal members may not serve on Tnbal Council and hold a management position for 
Mooretown Rancheria, Feather Falls Casino, or any business enterprise concurrently. 
Management is defined as administrative managers and department managers.

Any person removed from office by recall cannot run for office for 5 years.

SECTION 3. 

All elections of tribal officials shall be by secret ballot.

Each Tribal Council member shall be elected for a term of four (4)

SECTION 4. 
years. Terms of office for the seven (7) council members shall be staggered The election 
shall be conducted so that the Chairperson, Secretary, and Treasurer are elected for a term 
of four (4) years. The remaining members shall be elected for a term of four (4) years. 
Persons who are members of the Tribal Council at the time this Constitution is adopted 
and approved shall continue to serve on the Tribal Council until the regular annual 
elections, held on the third (3rd) week in March, for their respective offices. Elected 
officials shall hold and remain in office until their successors are duly elected and installed. 
Installation of Council Members shall be made at the next duly called regularly scheduled 
Tribal Council meeting following their election.

SECTION 5. Nomination. The time, place and manner of nominations shall be 
specified in the election ordinance adopted pursuant to Section 6, of this article

SECTION 6. Election Ordinance. An election ordinance shall be adopted by 
the Tribal Council within six (6) months following the effective date of this Constitution. 
Such ordinance shall include, but not be limited to, the following provisions: Election 
Committee, Secret balloting, nomination of candidates, absentee balloting, and a procedure 
for resolving election disputes. Provisions shall also be included regarding the conduct of 
recall and referendum elections, including a uniform procedure for submitting recall and 
referendum petitions. Elections to amend this Constitution shall be conducted in 
accordance with Article XV of this Constitution
 
 

ARTICLE V  - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 SECTION 1. Removal. Any member of the Tribal Council of the Mooretown 
Rancheria who, during the tenn for which he/she is elected or appointed, is convicted of a 

felony in any federal or state court shall automatically forfeit his/her office effective on the 
date of his/her initial conviction in court. Any member of the Tribal Council found guilty 
by the Tribal Council of behavior involving misconduct reflecting on the dignity and 
integrity of the tribal government, malfeasance in office, or gross neglect of duty shall be 
removed from office if at least four (4) members of the Tribal Council vote in favor of such 
removal. Voting must be by secret ballot and the chairperson is entitled to vote. The 
accused shall not have the right to cast a secret ballot. Before any vote for removal is 
taken, such member shall be given a written statement of the charges against him/her at 
least ten (10) days before the meeting of the Tribal Council which he/she is to appear and 
he/she shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all charges at the designated 
council meeting. The decision of the Tribal Council shall be final. No member of the 
Tribal Council shall preside over the meeting at which his/her removal is being considered.

SECTION 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty percent 
(30%) of the qualified voters of the Mooretown Rancheria, it shall be the duty of the Tribal 
Council to call and conduct within thirty (30) days an election to consider the recall of an 
elected official. The election shall be conducted pursuant to the election ordinance. Once 
the Tribal Council has been served with a recall petition against a council member, that 
council member shall no longer have any authority on the council until such time as the 
validity of the petition or the recall election has been decided. Once an individual has been 
subjected to recall proceedings, he/she shall not again be subject to such action for the 
same charge dining the balance of his/her term of office.

SECTION 3. Forfeiture. After due notice, it shall be the duty of the Tribal Council 
to immediately declare vacant any position and to promptly fill such vacancy in the manner 
provided in Article VI when it is determined that the incumbent:

(a)  Had died

(b)  Has resigned

(c)  Has been convicted while in office of a crime involving 
dishonesty.

(d)  Has been convicted of a felony while in office.

(e)  Has been absent, without being excused by the Tribal Council, for three (3)
consecutive meetings; provided, that the loss of office for such reason shall not 
serve to prevent a person from becoming a candidate for office in subsequent 
elections.

(f) 

Has ceased to reside physically in the State of California.

(g)  Has falsified his affidavit of qualifications, when being certified as a 
candidate for tribal office.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES

 
 SECTION 1. Any office which has been vacated, whether it be by removal, recall or 
forfeiture, shall be filled by appointment of a council member by the Tribal Council at it's 
next meeting and such replacement shall serve the unexpired term of office. If the 
unexpired term is for six (6) months or more it shall be filled by special election. The 
Tribal Council appointee shall serve until the special election is held
 
 

ARTICLE VII - POWERS OF THE GOVERNING 
COUNCIL OF MOORETOWN RANCHERIA

 
 SECTION 1. The Tribal Council of the Mooretown Rancheria shall have powers and 
responsibilities hereinafter provided:

To consult, negotiate, contract or conclude agreements with federal, state and 

(a) 
local governments on activities which may affect the Mooretown Rancheria.

(b) 

To employ legal counsel.

To manage, lease or otherwise operate all unassigned tribal property and to 

(c) 
oversee the use of, and development on assigned tribal lands.

(d) 

To acquire property and to accept gifts on behalf of the tribe.

(e) 

To join and/or charter tribal housing authorities.

(f) 

To charter tribal enterprises, corporations and associations.

To prescribe rules and regulations governing future membership, loss of 

(g) 
membership and adoption of members. The only way a lineal member can be 
terminated is if he or she relinquishes their rights on his or her own.

To establish business enterprises as branches of agencies of the Mooretown 

(h) 
Rancheria government and otherwise to engage in business activities which promote

the economic well-being of the tribe and its members.

To promulgate and enforce such ordinances as are deemed necessary to 
(i) 
safeguard and promote the peace, safety, health and general welfare of the members 
of the Mooretown Rancheria.

To promulgate and adopt ordinances to assure the complete jurisdiction 
(j) 
available to the Mooretown Rancheria pursuant to the Indian Child Welfare Act of 
1978, (25 U.S.C. 1918).

To promulgate and adopt ordinances necessary or incidental to the exercise 

(k) 
of any of the foregoing powers and duties as long as they are not in conflict with this 
Constitution

To establish reasonable and fair rules or procedures for the conduct of its 

(1) 
affairs.

(m)  To set compensation for travel and per diem of Council members, officers, 
and committee members as it believes is advisable.

To participate in educational programs and activities for the benefit and 

(n) 
welfare of the Tribe.

To have the authority to suspend or terminate the services of any employee 

(o) 
for cause. Said employee shall be granted the right to appeal such said Council 
action before a grievance committee.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 SECTION 1. Ordinances. All final decision on matters of general and permanent 
interest to members of the tribe shall be embodied in ordinances, such as an enrollment 
ordinance or an election ordinance. Such enactments shall be available for inspection by 
members of the General Membership during normal office hours.

SECTION 2. Resolutions and Motions. All final decisions on matters of short term 
or one time interest where a formal expression is needed shall be embodied in resolutions. 
Other decisions of a temporary nature or relating to particular individuals, officials or 
committees shall be put in the form of motions and noted in the Minutes and shall be 
available for inspection by members of the General Membership during normal office 
hours.

SECTION 3. All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and numbered, and shall 
include a certification showing the presence of a quorum and the number of members 
voting for/against the proposed enactment.

SECTION 4. No enactment of the Lineal Voting Members or Tribal Council of the 
Mooretown Rancheria shall have any validity or effect in the absence of a quorum of the 
membership thereof at a legally called session.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - REFERENDUM

 
 SECTION 1. Upon presentation to the Tribal Council of a petition signed by thirty 
(30%) of the qualified voters, the Tribal Council shall either (1) adopt the provisions of the 
petition by ordinance, resolution or other appropriate action; or (2) provide that the issue 
presented by the petition be voted on within forty five (45) days, by secret ballot, at a 
regular or special election. The Mooretown Rancheria shall abide by the vote of two- 
thirds (2/3) majority of the voters in any such election, provided that at least fifty-one 
(51%) of those eligible to vote have voted.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1 The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights Act 
of 1968 (82 Stat. 73), against actions of a tribe in the exercise of its powers of self
government shall apply to the Mooretown Rancheria, it’s officers and all persons within it's 
jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE XI  - MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held as needed in a 
place designated by the Tribal Council. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be 
called by the Chairperson and shall be called by him/her upon receipt of a petition signed 
by at least four (4) Tribal Council members and when so called, the Tribal Council shall 
have the power to transact business as in regular meetings provided that a quorum is 
present. All members of the Tribal Council shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) 
hours in advance of al) special tribal meetings. Notice may be waived by the unanimous 
consent of all seven (7) Tribal Council Members, this does not include the alternates.

SECTION 2, A quorum for the purpose of convening a meeting of the Tribal Council 
shall be six (6) Tribal Council members. Business can be conducted as soon as the 
meeting is properly convened. Official Tribal Council actions shall be taken by majority 
vote of the members present, providing that a quorum is present at the time of the vote or 
action. This includes the alternates.

SECTION 3. Regular meetings of the General Membership shall be held quarterly. 
Special meetings of the General Membership may be called by the Chairperson, or shall be 
called by him/her upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least thirty (30%) of the 
Lineal Voting Membership.

SECTION 4, A quorum of the General Membership shall consist of thirty (30%) of 
the Lineal Voting Members. Action may be taken by the concurrence of a majority of the 
Lineal Voting Members present at any duly called meeting providing that a quorum is 
present at the time of the vote or action.

SECTION 5, 
conduct of meetings.

The Tribal Council shall establish rules of procedure governing the 
 
 

ARTICLE XII - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 SECTION 1. Newly elected officers shall assume their respective offices and duties 
at the regular council meeting immediately following the election.

SECTION 2. The chairperson shall preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council and 
of the General membership and shall execute on behalf of the Mooretown Rancheria 
contracts, leases or other documents approved by the Tribal council. He/she shall have 
general supervision of all other officers, the administrator and committees of the 
Mooretown Rancheria and see that their duties are properly performed. When the Tribal 
Council is not in session, he/she shall be the official representative of the Mooretown 
Rancheria.

SECTION 3. The Vice-Chairperson shall assist the Chairperson when called upon to 
do so. In the absence of the Chairperson, he/she shall preside and when so presiding shall 
have all rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of the Chairperson.

SECTION 4. The Secretary shall keep the Minutes of all General Membership and 
Tribal Council meetings and shall attest to the enactment of all resolutions and ordinances. 
Copies of resolutions and ordinances shall be submitted by him/her to the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs in a timely manner. The Secretary shall issue notices of all General Membership

and Tribal Council meetings.

SECTION 5. The Treasurer shall carry out the financial directives of the Tribal 
Council, receive all local monies of the Mooretown Rancheria and keep an accurate 
account of the receipts and disbursements. Funds shall be deposited in the Mooretown 
Rancheria account in a local bank selected by the Tribal Council where depositor's funds 
are insured by the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. All disbursements shall be 
made by check in accordance with resolutions of the Tribal Council. The Treasurer shall 
file a bond satisfactory to the Tribal Council as requested by the Tribal Council, and all 
financial records shall be available for inspection by any member of the Mooretown 
Rancheria through appointment according to procedure established by the Tribal Council. 
At the expiration of his/her term of office, the Secretary and Treasurer shall turn over all 
the records and papers in his/her possession to the Tribal Council. The Treasurer shall 
make a financial report to the General Membership quarterly.

SECTION 6.  Nepotism.

(a)  "Immediate family member" as used in this section means husband, wife, brother, 
sister, son, daughter, father, mother.

(b)  No two immediate family members may serve as officers or signatories (check 
signers) on the same check.

(c)  No officer or other member of the Tribal Council shall participate in or attempt to 
influence a decision of the Tribal Council that will have a direct effect on an immediate 
family member other than a decision that affects the family member in the same way as all 
other members of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this Constitution shall, in the future, be declared invalid by a Court of 
competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the 
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - AMENDMENTS

 
 SECTION 1. This Constitution may be amended in the same manner as provided for 
adoption in Article XV. Amendments adopted in this way shall be effective from the date

of such adoption, unless otherwise provided in the amendment itself. Amendments may be 
proposed by the Tribal Council or upon receipt of a petition signed by at least thirty 
percent (30%) of the Lineal Voting Members.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution shall be effective when adopted by a two-thirds (2/3) majority vote of 
the qualified Lineal Voting Members of the Mooretown Rancheria voting at an election 
called for that purpose, provided that fifty-one (51%) of the Lineal Voting Members, vote 
at that election by secret ballot.
 
 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 
MOORETOWN RANCHERIA

 
 Amended on January 2, 1999 by the 
General Lineal Voting Membership

1-7-99
Date

1-7-99

Date

Date

Date

1-7-99

Date

1-7-99

Date

1-7-99

Date

Shirley Prusia, Tribal Chairperson

Gary Archuleta, Vice-Chairperson

Marion Contreras, Secretary

Kim Newton, Treasurer

Janice Taylor, Council Member

Ken Gilbert, Council Member

Antonio Archuleta, Council Member

