DATE DOWNLOADED: Tue Jan 17 16:08:34 2023 
SOURCE: Content Downloaded from HeinOnline

Citations:

Bluebook 21st ed.
Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria (1987).

ALWD 7th ed.
. Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria (1987).

APA 7th ed.
(1987) 

. Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria. S.I., s.n.

Chicago 17th ed.
Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria. S.I., s.n.

McGill Guide 9th ed.
Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria (S.I.: s.n., 1987)

AGLC 4th ed.
Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria (s.n., 1987

MLA 9 th ed.
Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria. S.I., s.n. HeinOnline.

OSCOLA 4th ed.
Constitution of the Mooretown Rancheria. S.I., s.n.

Provided by:
Pritzker Legal Research Center, Northwestern Pritzker School of Law

-- Your use of this HeinOnline PDF indicates your acceptance of HeinOnline's Terms and 

Conditions of the license agreement available at
https://heinonline.org/HOL/License

-- The search text of this PDF is generated from uncorrected OCR text.
 
 

CONSTITUTION

OF THE

MOORETOWN RANCHERIA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Mooretown Rancheria, being of the 

Maidu/Concow Indian Tribe located in Butte County, the State of 

California, in order to promote our common welfare and to 

secure to ourselves and our descendants the rights, powers and 

privileges conferred by the Tribe’s inherent rights of self

government.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - TERRITORY

 
 This Constitution shall apply to all territory belonging to the 

Mooretown Rancheria and such land as may be hereafter 

adjudicated in favor or acquired by or for the Mooretown 

Rancheria.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. Membership in the Mooretown Rancheria shall consist 

of all persons living on the effective date of this 

Constitution who were listed as distributees and dependent 

members of their immediate families in the Plan for 

Distribution of the Assets of the Mooretown Rancheria as

approved. Additionally, membership shall include:

(a) 

Persons who are lineal descendants of the individuals 

eligible for membership under Section 1 above, 

regardless whether the ancestor through whom 

eligibility is claimed is living or deceased.

(b) 

Any other person of Indian descent determined by the 

membership as per enrollment ordinance to be eligible 

for adoption into the tribe.

SECTION 2. A person who has been allotted lands on another 

reservation or is officially enrolled with or is a recognized 

member of some other tribe or band shall not be enrolled, 

unless he/she relinquishes membership with that band or tribe. 

A "recognized member of another tribe or rancheria” is a person 

whose name is listed on the membership roll of another tribe, 

rancheria or has received a land use assignment on another 

reservation. Inherited interests in trust allotments shall not 

disqualify a person from membership, however.

SECTION 3. The official membership roll shall be prepared in 

accordance with an ordinance adopted by the governing body. 

Such ordinance shall contain provisions for enrollment 

procedures, enrollment committee, applications, rejection 

notice, appeals, corrections and provisions for keeping the 

roll on current basis.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 SECTION 1. The governing body of the Mooretown Rancheria shall 

be the Tribal Council of the Mooretown Rancheria. The Tribal

Council shall consist of seven (7) members elected at-large 

from the Mooretown Rancheria, including four officers, a 

Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer and 

three (3) members. For the initial election and each 

succeeding election the officers and members shall be those 

candidates for each vacant office who received the highest 

number of votes cast by plurality of the qualified voters in 

the election. Other committees may be appointed or elected 

when deemed necessary. 

SECTION 2. General Membership. The General Membership 

consists of all members of the Mooretown Rancheria, twenty-one 

(21) years of age or older. The General Membership exercises 

it's power through referendum and amendment and such other 

powers delegated to it by this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS 

 
 SECTION 1. Voter Qualification. All enrolled members of 

Mooretown Rancheria twenty-one (21) years of age or older, 

other than members adopted into the Tribe, regardless of 

residence, are qualified voters. Persons adopted into the 

Tribe who are not lineal descendants of original distributees 

or dependent members shall not have the right to vote in tribal 

elections.

SECTION 2. Qualification of Candidates. All candidates for 

the Tribal Council must be qualified voters of the Mooretown 

Rancheria twenty-one (21) years of age or older, who reside 

within the state of California. No person who has been 

convicted of a felony within three (3) years preceding 

the election shall be eligible to hold office on the 

Mooretown Rancheria Tribal Council.

SECTION 3. All elections of tribal officials shall be by 

secret ballot.

SECTION 4. Each Tribal Council member shall be elected for a 

term of two (2) years. Terms of office for the seven (7) 

council members shall be staggered. The initial election shall 

be conducted so that the Chairperson, Secretary, and Treasurer 

are elected for a term of two (2) years. The remaining members 

shall be elected for a term of one (1) year. Persons who are 

members of the Tribal Council at the time this Constitution is 

adopted and approved shall continue to serve on the Tribal 

Council until the regular annual elections for their respective 

offices. Elected officials shall hold and remain in office 

until their successors are duly elected and installed. 

Installation shall be made at the next duly called regular 

Tribal Council meeting following their election.

SECTION 5. Nomination. The time, place and manner of 

nominations shall be specified in the election ordinance 

adopted pursuant to Section 6, of this article.

SECTION 6. Election Ordinance. An election ordinance shall be 

adopted by the Tribal Council within six (6) months following 

the effective date of this Constitution. Such ordinance shall 

include, but not be limited to, the following provisions: 

Secret balloting, nomination of candidates, absentee balloting, 

and a procedure for resolving election disputes.

Provisions shall also be included regarding the conduct of 

recall and referendum elections, including a uniform procedure 

for submitting recall and referendum petitions. Elections to 

amend this Constitution shall be conducted in accordance with 

Article XVII of this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 SECTION 1. Removal. Any member of the Tribal Council of the 

Mooretown Rancheria who, during the term for which he/she is 

elected or appointed, is convicted of a felony in any federal 

or state court shall automatically forfeit his/her office 

effective on the date of his/her initial conviction in court. 

Any member of the Tribal Council found guilty by the Tribal 

Council of behavior involving misconduct reflecting on the 

dignity and integrity of the tribal government, malfeasance in 

office, or gross neglect of duty shall be removed from office 

if at least four (4) members of the Tribal Council vote in 

favor of such removal. Voting must be by secret ballot and the 

chairperson is entitled to vote. The accused shall have the 

right to cast a secret ballot. Before any vote for removal is 

taken, such member shall be given a written statement of the 

charges against him/her at least ten (10) days before the 

meeting of the Tribal Council which he/she is to appear and 

he/she shall be given an opportunity to answer any and all 

charges at the designated council meeting. The decision of the 

Tribal Council shall be final. No member of the Tribal Council 

shall preside over the meeting at which his/her removal is

being considered.

ECTION 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at 

least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters of the 

Mooretown Rancheria, it shall be the duty of the Tribal Council 

to call and conduct within thirty (30) days an election to 

consider the recall of an elected official.

The election shall be conducted pursuant to the election 

ordinance. Once an individual has been subjected to recall 

proceedings, he/she shall not again be subject to such action 

for the same charge during the balance of his/her term of 

office.

SECTION 3. Forfeiture. After due notice, it shall be the duty 

of the Tribal Council to immediately declare vacant any 

osition and to promptly fill such vacancy in the manner 

provided in Article VII when it is determined that the 

incumbent:

(a)  Had died

(b)  Has resigned

(c)  Has been convicted while in office of a crime 

involving dishonesty.

(d)  Has been convicted of a felony while in office.

(e)  Has been absent, without being excused by the Tribal 

Council, for three (3) consecutive meetings; provided, 

that the loss of office for such reason shall not 

serve to prevent a person from becoming a candidate 

for office in subsequent elections.

(f)  Has ceased to reside physically in the State of 

California.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - VACANCIES

 
 SECTION 1. Any office which has been vacated, whether it be by 

removal, recall or forfeiture, shall be filled by appointment 

of the Tribal Council at it's next meeting and such replacement 

shall serve the unexpired term of office unless the unexpired 

term is for nine (9) months or more, in which case it shall be 

filled by special election.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS OF THE GOVERNING

COUNCIL OF MOORETOWN RANCHERIA

 
 SECTION 1. The Tribal Council of the Mooretown Rancheria shall 

have powers and responsibilities hereinafter provided:

(a)  To consult, negotiate, contract or conclude agreements 

with federal, state and local governments on 

activities which may affect the Mooretown Rancheria.

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and 

fixing of fees, to be subject to the approval of the 

Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 

representative.

(c)  To receive advice from and make recommendations to the 

Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 

appropriation estimates for all projects which are for 

the benefit of members of the Mooretown Rancheria 

prior to the submission of such estimates to the

Office of Management and Budget and Congress.

(d)  To manage, lease or otherwise operate all unassigned 

tribal property and to oversee the use of, and 

development on assigned tribal lands.

(e)  To acquire property and to accept gifts for the tribe. 

(f) To join and/or charter tribal housing authorities.

(g)  To charter tribal enterprises, corporations and 

associations.

(h)  To prescribe rules and regulations governing future 

membership, loss of membership and adoption of 

members.

(i)  To establish business enterprises as branches of 

agencies of the Mooretown Rancheria government and 

otherwise to engage in business activities which 

promote the economic well-being of the tribe and its 

members.

(j)  To promulgate and enforce such ordinances as are 

deemed necessary to safeguard and promote the peace, 

safety, health and general welfare of the members of 

the Mooretown Rancheria.

(k)  To promulgate and adopt ordinances to assure the 

complete jurisdiction available to the Mooretown 

Rancheria pursuant to the Indian Child Welfare Act of 

1978, (25 U.S.C. 1918).

(1)  To promulgate and adopt ordinances necessary or 

incidental to the exercise of any of the foregoing 

powers and duties as long as they are not in conflict

with this Constitution.

(m)  To establish reasonable and fair rules or procedures 

for the conduct of its affairs.

(n)  To set compensation for travel and per diem of Council 

members, officers, and committee members as it 

believes is advisable.

(o)  To participate in educational programs and activities 

for the benefit and welfare of the Tribe.

(p)  To have the authority to suspend or terminate the 

services of any employee for cause. Said employee 

shall be granted the right to appeal such said Council 

action before a grievance committee.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POWERS OF THE GENERAL MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1. Any rights and powers which have at any time been 

vested or shall in the future be vested in the Mooretown 

Rancheria, but which are not expressly referred to in this 

Constitution, shall not be limited or forfeited by the fact 

that they are not listed here. Such rights and powers may be 

exercised by the General Membership or delegated by it to the 

Tribal Council or other officers and agencies of the tribe 

without amendment of this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 SECTION 1. Ordinances. All final decision on matters of 

general and permanent interest to members of the tribe shall be 

embodied in ordinances, such as an enrollment ordinance or an 

election ordinance. Such enactments shall be available for 

inspection by members of the General Membership during normal 

office hours.

SECTION 2. Resolutions and Motions. All final decisions on 

matters of short term or one time interest where a 

formal expression is needed shall be embodied in 

resolutions. Other decisions of a temporary nature or 

relating to particular individuals, officials or 

committees shall be put in the form of motions and noted 

in the Minutes and shall be available for inspection by 

members of the General Membership during normal office 

hours.

SECTION 3. All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and 

numbered, and shall include a certification showing the 

presence of a quorum and the number of members voting 

for/against the proposed enactment.

SECTION 4. No enactment of the General Membership of Tribal 

Council of the Mooretown Rancheria shall have any validity or 

effect in the absence of a quorum of the membership thereof at 

a legally called session.

SECTION 5. Approval of Tribal Enactments. Any resolution or 

ordinance which by the terms of this Constitution or federal 

laws requires the approval of the Secretary of the Interior 

must be received by the local Bureau Superintendent no later 

than thirty (30) days following its enactment in order to be 

considered for approval. It shall be the duty of the 

Secretary's local representative to issue acknowledgment of 

receipt of such enactment within five (5) working days of the 

receipt thereof. If timely filed, that enactment shall not 

become effective until it is approved by the Secretary’s 

authorized representative, provided that if such enactment is 

not disapproved within ninety (90) days from the date it is 

timely received by the Secretary's local representative, it 

shall on the ninety-first (91st) day automatically become 

effective.
 
 

ARTICLE XI  - REFERENDUM

 
 SECTION 1. Upon presentation to the Tribal Council of a 

petition signed by twenty-five percent (25%) of the qualified 

voters, the Tribal Council shall either (1) adopt the 

provisions of the petition by ordinance, resolution or other 

appropriate action; or (2) provide that the issue presented by 

the petition be voted on within sixty (60) days, by secret 

ballot, at a regular or special election. The Mooretown 

Rancheria shall abide by the vote of the majority of the voters 

in any such election, provided that at least twenty-five 

percent (25%) of those eligible to vote have voted.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 1. The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of 

the Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 Stat. 73), against actions of 

a tribe in the exercise of its powers of self-government shall 

apply to the Mooretown Rancheria, it’s officers and all persons 

within it's jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII  - MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be 

held on the second Saturday of each month in a place designated 

by the Tribal Council. Special meetings of the Tribal Council 

may be called by the Chairperson and shall be called by him/her 

upon receipt of a petition signed by at least three (3) Tribal 

Council members and when so called, the Tribal Council shall 

have the power to transact business as in regular meetings 

provided that a quorum is present. Members of the Tribal 

Council shall be notified at least twenty-four (24) hours in 

advance of all special tribal meetings. Notice may be waived 

by unanimous consent.

SECTION 2. A quorum for the purpose of convening a meeting of 

Tribal Council shall be four (4) members. Business can be 

conducted as soon as the meeting is properly convened.

Official Tribal Council actions shall be taken by majority vote 

of the members present.

SECTION 3. Regular meetings of the General Membership shall be 

held annually on the Saturday before Easter in March or April 

whichever month Easter falls in. Special meetings of the 

General Membership may be called by the Chairperson and shall 

be called by him/her upon receipt of a petition signed by at 

least twenty-five percent (25%) of the members of the General 

Membership.

SECTION 4. A quorum of the General Membership shall consist of 

twenty-five percent (25%) of the General Membership, except at 

the initial tribal election. Action may be taken by the 

concurrence of a majority of the members present at any duly 

called meeting providing that a quorum was established at the 

beginning of the meeting.

SECTION 5. The Governing Council shall establish rules of 

procedure governing the conduct of meetings and accounting 

procedures that comply with generally accepted accounting 

standards.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV -DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 SECTION 1. Newly elected officers shall assume their 

respective offices and duties at the regular council meeting 

immediately following the election.

SECTION 2. The Chairperson shall preside at all meetings of 

the Tribal Council and of the General Membership and shall 

execute on behalf of the Mooretown Rancheria contracts, leases 

or other documents approved by the Tribal Council. He/she 

shall have general supervision of all other officer, employees 

and committees of the Mooretown Rancheria and see that their 

duties are properly performed. When the Tribal Council is not 

in session, he/she shall.be the official representative of the 

Mooretown Rancheria.

SECTION 3. The Vice-Chairperson shall assist the Chairperson 

when called upon to do so. In the absence of the Chairperson, 

he/she shall preside and when so presiding shall have all 

rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of the 

Chairperson.

SECTION 4. The Secretary shall keep the Minutes of all

meetings and shall attest to the enactment of all resolutions 

and ordinances. Copies of all Minutes, resolutions and 

ordinances shall be submitted by him/her to the Bureau of 

Indian Affairs as soon after enactment as possible. The 

Secretary shall issue notices of all meetings and elections and 

conduct all general correspondence as directed by the Tribal 

Council.

SECTION 5. The Treasurer shall carry out the financial 

directives of the Tribal Council, receive all local monies of 

the Mooretown Rancheria and keep an accurate account of the 

receipts and disbursements. Funds shall be deposited in the 

Mooretown Rancheria account in a local bank selected by the 

Tribal Council where depositor's funds are insured by the 

Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation. All disbursements shall 

be made by check in accordance with resolutions of the Tribal 

Council. The Treasurer shall file a bond satisfactory to the 

Tribal Council as requested by the Tribal Council, and all 

financial records shall be available for inspection by any 

member of the Mooretown Rancheria through appointment according 

to procedure established by the Tribal Council. At the 

expiration of his/her term of office, the Secretary and 

Treasurer shall turn over all the records and papers in his/her 

possession to the Tribal Council.

SECTION 6. Nepotism. (a) "Immediate family member" as used 

in this section means husband, wife, brother, sister, son, 

daughter, father, mother, brother-in-law, sister-in-law, 

mother-in-law, father-in-law, stepchild, stepparent,

grandmother, grandfather, grandson, granddaughter.

(b)  No two immediate family members may serve as officers at 

the same time.

(c)  No officer or other member of the Tribal Council shall 

participate in or attempt to influence a decision of the Tribal 

Council that will have a direct effect on an immediate family 

member other than a decision that affects the family member in 

the same way as all other members of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this Constitution shall, in the future, be 

declared invalid by a Court of competent jurisdiction, the 

invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the 

remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - AMENDMENTS

 
 SECTION 1. This Constitution may be amended in the same manner 

as provided for adoption in Article XVII.- Amendments adopted 

in this way shall be effective from the date of such adoption, 

unless otherwise provided in the amendment itself. Amendments 

may be proposed by the Tribal Council or upon receipt of a 

petition signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the 

eligible voters.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution shall be effective when adopted by a majority 

vote of the qualified voters of the Mooretown Rancheria voting 

at an election called for that purpose.
 
 

CONSTITUTION

OF THE

MOORETOWN RANCHERIA

FINAL DRAFT

APPROVED BY THE BODY

 
 NOVEMBER 21, 1987

DATE: 12-2-87

DATE: 12-2-87

DATE: 12-2-87

DATE: 12-2-87

DATE: 12-2-87

DATE: 12-2-87

DATE: 12-2-87

