 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE


 
  
 NISQUALLY INDIAN COMMUNITY. OF THE  
 

NISQUALLY RESERVATION 

WASHINGTON

 
 ♦

APPROVED SEPTEMBER 9, 1946
 
  
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1951 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE NISQUALLY 
INDIAN COMMUNITY OF THE NISQUALLY RESERVA
TION, WASHINGTON


Preamble

We, the members of the Nisqually Reservation in order to establish 
a community organization and secure certain privileges and powers 
offered to us by the Indian Reorganization Act, do ordain and es
tablish this Constitution and By-laws for the Nisqually Indian Com
munity.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Nisqually Indian Community shall extend 
to the territory within the confines of the Nisqually Reservation as 
established by the Treaty of Medicine Creek, December 26, 1854 (10 
Stat. 1132) and by Executive Order January 20, 1857, and such other 
lands as may hereafter be added thereto under any law of the United 
States, except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Nisqually Indian Community 

shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll of the Nisqually Reservation as of July 1, 1945, provided 
that such roll may be corrected by the Community Council with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  All children born to any member who is a resident of the 
Nisqually Indian Community at the time of birth of said children and 
who are 14 degree of Indian blood or more.

Sec. 2. The governing body shall have the power to promulgate 
ordinances subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, govern
ing future membership and the adoption of new members when the 
resources of the Community make such adoptions feasible.

Article III—The Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Nisqually Indian Commu
nity shall be the Community Council, which shall be composed of all 
qualified voters of the Nisqually Indians. Twenty-five percent of the 
eligible voters shall constitute a quorum.

Sec. 2. The Community Council shall elect from its own members 
by secret ballot (a) a chairman, (b) a vice-chairman, (c) a secretary, 
(d) a treasurer, and (e) such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary.

Sec. 3. The Community Council shall meet on the first Monday 
of January and July. If the first Monday should fall on a legal 
holiday the meeting shall be held on the Tuesday following the regular 
meeting.

Sec. 4. Within sixty days after the ratification and approval of 
this Constitution and Bylaws, the Community Council shall be called 
for the purpose of electing the officers' named herein, and it may 
transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers elected 
at this meeting shall serve until the January meeting 1947 at which 
time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be 
chosen every two years at the January meeting.

Sec. 5. The Chairman, or 10 percent of the qualified voters, may 

by written notice, call special meetings of the Community Council.

Sec. 6. The Business Committee shall consist of the chairman, vice
chairman, secretary, and treasurer of the Community Council, and 
shall perform such duties as may be authorized by that Council.

Article IV—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If an officer of the Community Council shall die. per
manently leave the Community, or shall be found guilty of a felony 
or misdemeanor involving dishonesty in any Indian, State, or Federal 
Court, the Community Council shall declare the position vacant and 
shall appoint a new member to serve until the next regular election 
when a successor shall be elected.

Sec. 2. Upon receipt of a petition signed by one-third (1/3) of the 
eligible voters demanding the recall of any officer of the Community 
Council, it shall be the duty of the Community Council to call an 
election on such recall petition. No member may be recalled in any 
such election unless at least 30 percent of the qualified voters shall vote 
in the election.

Sec. 3. The Community Council may by an affirmative vote of two- 
thirds (2/3) of its members expel any officer for neglect of duty or gross 
misconduct provided that the accused officer shall be given full and 
fair opportunity to reply to any and all charges at a designated 
Council meeting. It is further stipulated that any such officer shall 
be given a written statement of the charges against him at least 5 
days before the meeting at which he is to appear.

Article V—Powers of the Community Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Community Council of the 
Nisqually Indian Community shall exercise the following powers, 
subject to any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Constitution 
of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments;
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets;

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appro
priation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Com
munity prior to submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 
Budget and to Congress;

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Nisqually 
Indian Community in accordance with the terms of a charter that 
may be issued to the Community by the Secretary of the Interior;

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior governing the conduct of 
members of the Nisqually Indian Community; providing for the 
manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of tribal land 
or interests therein; providing for the levying of taxes and the appro
priation of available funds of the Community for public purposes; 
providing for the licensing of nonmembers coming upon the reser
vation for purposes of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, 
and for the exclusion from the territory of the Community of persons 
not so licensed and establishing proper agencies for the enforcement 
of such ordinances upon the reservation;

(g)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinance or resolution, subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior;

(h)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards or 
officials of the Community, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power;
(i) To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and attached Bylaws regulating the procedure of the Community 
Council and of other Community organizations of the Nisqually 
Indian Community.

Sec. 2. Future Powers.—The Community Council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to it by the 

Secretary of the Interior, or any other duly authorized official or 
agency of the State or Federal Government.

Sec. 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Nisqually Indians but not expressly referred to in this Constitu
tion, shall not be abridged by this Article, but may be exercised by 
the members of the Nisqually Indian Community through the adop
tion of appropriate bylaws and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance, which 
by the terms of this constitution shall be subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent 
in charge of the reservation, who shall, within ten days after its 
enactment, approve or disapprove the same. If the Superintendent 
shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become 
effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, 
bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, 
within ninety days from the date of enactment, rescind the said 
ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying the Community 
Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or reso
lution submitted to him within ten days after its enactment, he shall 
advise the Community Council of his reasons therefor. If these 
reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by majority vote, 
refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who 
may, within ninety days from the date of its enactment, approve the 
same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall 
become effective.

Article VI—Bill of Rights

Section 1. Suffrage.—All members of the Nisqually Indian Com
munity over the age of twenty-one (21) years shall have the right to 
vote in all Community elections.

Sec. 2. Economic Rights.—All members of the Community shall be 
accorded equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources 
and activities of the Community.

Sec. 3. Civil Liberties.—All members of the Community shall enjoy 
without hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, as
sembly, and association.

Article VII—Amendments

Section 1. This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Community, voting at an 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior: Provided, 

That at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in 
such election, but no amendment shall become effective until it shall 
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. At any regular or special Community Council meeting, 
amendments to this Constitution and Bylaws may be proposed to be 
acted upon at the next semiannual Community Council meeting. If 
approved by a majority vote at such meeting, the proposed amend
ment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, who shall 
thereupon call an election upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE NISQUALLY INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 Article I

It shall be the duty of the Chairman to preside over all meetings 
of the Community Council and carry out all orders of the Council. 
All members of the Council and all subordinate officers shall assist 
the chairman in all proper ways to carry out the orders of the Council.

Article II

The Community Council Secretary shall keep a full report of all 
proceedings of each regular and special meeting of the Community 
Council and of the Business Committee, and shall perform such other 
duties of like nature as the Community Council shall from time to time 
by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of the minutes of each 
meeting to the Superintendent in charge of the reservation and to 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Article III

The Community Council Treasurer shall be the custodian of all 
moneys which may come under the jurisdiction or into the control of 
the Community Council. He shall pay out money in accordance with 
the orders and resolutions of the Community Council. He shall keep 
account of all receipts and disbursements, and shall report the same 
to the Community Council at each regular meeting. He shall be 
bonded in such an amount as the Community Council may by resolu
tion, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, provide. The 
books of the Council treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection 
at the direction of the Community Council or the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs. Until the treasurer is bonded, the Business Com
mittee may make such provision for the custody and disbursement of 
funds as shall guarantee their safe and proper disbursement and use.

Article IV

The subordinate officers of the Community Council shall perform 
such duties as the Community Council may from time to time provide 
by resolution.

Article V

It shall be the duty of the Community Council and each member 
thereof to promote the general welfare of members of the Community, 
and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this Constitution and 
By-laws.

Article VI

Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of 
office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall 
pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States and this Constitution and By-laws:

Oath: “I, _____________________________, do solemnly swear
that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States 
against all enemies; that I will carry out faithfully and impartially 
the duties of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, 
promote, and protect the best interests of my people, in accordance 
with this Constitution and By-laws.”

Article VII

The order of business at any regular or special meeting of the Com

munity Council shall be as follows:

1.  Call to order by the chairman;
2.  Roll call ;
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting;
4.  Reports of committees;
5.  Report of the treasurer;
6.  Reading of the communications;
7.  Unfinished business;
8.  New business;
9.  Adjournment.

Article VIII

The Community Council shall have the power to elect delegates to 

sit in a Central General Council of Northwest Indians.

Article IX

Ratification of Constitution and By-laws.—This Constitution and 
By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote of the voters of the Nisqually

Indians voting at a special election called by the Secretary of 
the Interior in which at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote shall 
vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his ap
proval, and shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved May 29, 1946, by the Assistant Sec
retary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Nisqually Indian 
Community of the Nisqually Reservation, Washington, and was on 
July 27, 1946. duly adopted by a vote of 17 for, and 0 against, in an 
election in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their 
ballots in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 
15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Paul Leschi,
Chairman. Election Board.
Gertrude Kover, 
Secretary, Election Board.

.

Approved: August 1,1946. 
George P. LaVatta,

Superintendent, Taholah Agency.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, C. Girard Davidson, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 948), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Nisqually Indian Com
munity of the Nisqually Reservation, Washington.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and 
By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the members of the Nis
qually Indian Community of the Nisqually Reservation, Washington.
All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended: August 22, 1946.
John H. Provinse,

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

[seal] 

C. Girard Davidson,

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.

Washington, D. C., September 9, 1946.

