 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS  
 
OF THE 

NOOKSACK INDIAN TRIBE OF WASHINGTON

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Nooksack Indian Tribe of the State of Washington, in 

order to establish our tribal organization, to conserve our tribal property, to 

develop our common resources, to establish justice, and to promote the welfare 
of ourselves and our descendants, do hereby ordain and establish this constitu

tion and bylaws under the provisions of Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization 

Act of June IS, 1934 (48 Stat.984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 
Stat .378 ).
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Nooksack Indian Tribe shall extend to all lands now held 

in the name of the tribe or which hereafter may be acquired for or by and held 
in the name of the Nooksack Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Nooksack Indian Tribe shall consist of:

(a)  All original Nooksack Public Domain allottees, and their descendants 

living on January I, 1942.

(b)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census 
roll of the tribe dated January 1, 1942, provided that the January 1, 

1942 roll may be corrected by the tribe with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  All persons born to any enrolled member of the Nooksack Indian Tribe 
subsequent to January 1, 1942 provided such persons possess at least 

one-fourth (1/4) degree Indian blood.

(d)  No person shall be accepted for Nooksack membership who is enrolled as 
a member of any other organized tribe, band, or Indian community which 

is officially recognized by the Secretary of the Interior.

(e)  Official membership rolls of the tribe shall be approved by the govern

ing body of the tribe and by the Secretary of the Interior or his 

authorized representative.

Section 2. The governing body shall have the power to pass ordinances, subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, governing future membership 
including adoptions and loss of membership.

ARTICLE IIl - GOVERNING BODY

Section 1. The governing body of the Nooksack Indian Tribe shall be known as 

the Nooksack Indian Tribal Council, and shall be elected by the qualified voters 

of the tribe.

Sect ion 2. The governing body under this constitution shall be composed of one 
(1) chairman, one (1) vice-chairman, one (1) secretary, one (1) treasurer, and 

four (4) councilmen.

Sect ion 3. The officers and counciImen provided for in Section 2 of this 

Article shall be elected for two (2) year terms of office and/or until his suc
cessor is duly installed into office. The first election of a tribal council 
under this constitution shall be called and held within thirty (30) days after 

the approval of this constitution, and therefore elections shall be held every 
two (2) years on a date to be determined by the Nooksack Indian Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - ELECTIONS AND NOMINATIONS

 
 Section 1. All enrolled members of the Nooksack Indian Tribe, eighteen (18) 
years of age or over, shall have the right to vote.

Sect ion 2. No person shall be a candidate for membership in the tribal council 

or other tribal office unless he is a member of the Nooksack Indian Tribe, has 

resided in Whatcom County one (1) year immediately preceding the election, and 
is over eighteen (18) years of age.

Sect ion 3. Any member of the tribe meeting requirements of Section 2 may become 
a candidate for any office upon filing with the secretary of the tribal council 
a petition signed by at least ten (10) legal voters, provided that no two (2) 

members of one (1) household are allowed to run for office in the same 

election. The tribal council shall be the sole judge of the qualifications of 
its own members.

Section 4. When any election is to be held, the chairman of the tribal council 
shall appoint a superintendent of the election, and the superintendent so

2

2-

appointed shall have the power to appoint two (2) ballot clerks. The superin

tendent and the clerks he may appoint shall constitute the election board. The 
duties of this election board shall be to supervise and certify the election, 
and resolve all election disputes.
 
 

ARTICLE V - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE

 
 Section 1. If any officer or member of the tribal council shall absent himself 

from any three (3) consecutive regular or special meetings without sufficient 
reason, the other members may declare the office vacant by a five-sevenths (5/7) 
vote of the tribal council.

Sect ion 2. Any officer or member of the tribal council who while in office is 
convicted of a felony by any Federal, State, or Indian court may be removed 
from office by a five-sevenths (5/7) vote of the tribal council.

Sect ion 3. If any vacancies occur in the membershp of the tribal council through 

resignation, removal, recall, or death, the tribal council, by majority vote, 

shall proceed to appoint a new councilman to finish the unexpired term of such 
member.

Sect ion 4. RecalI.

(a)  Every person elected to a tribal office by the Nooksack Indians of the 

Nooksack Indian Tribe is subject to recall from such office upon a 
petition of thirty percent (30%) of the number of those 'who voted in 

the last election. Upon receipt of a valid recall petition by the 

tribal council secretary, the tribal council shall hold a special 
recall election not less that ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) 
days from the date the petition is filed.

(b)  The ballot used at such election shall contain the question: "Shall 

Indian Tribe?" and shall contain a space opposite such question, in 

which shall appear the words "Yes - No."

be recalled from office in the Nooksack 

Sect ion 5. Any member who it is proposed to remove or recall shall not take part 

in any deliberation of the tribal council regarding such action, nor shall he 

have a vote in any tribal council action pertaining to his own removal or recall.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Nooksack Indian Tribal Council shall exercise the following 
powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution 

of the United States, and subject to all restrictions upon such powers contained 

in this constitution.

(a)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets without the consent 

of the tribe.

(b)  To enter into negotiations with the Federal, State, and local govern

ments on behalf of the tribe.

(c)  To present and prosecute any claims or demands of the Nooksack Indian 

Tribe. It shall have the right to assist members of the tribe in pre
senting their claims and grievances before any court or agency of 

government.

(d)  To employ attorneys of record or representatives, the choice of coun- 

cel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary 

of the Interior.

(e)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior and Congress of its wishes 

with regard to Federal projects or appropriations for the benefit of 

the Nooksack Indian Tribe.

(f)  To select subordinate boards, officials, and employees not otherwise 

provided for in this constitution and to prescribe their tenure and 

duties; to authorize and establish any association or organization 

having for its purpose and sole objective the benefit of the members 

of the Nooksack Indian Tribe.

(g)  To create and maintain a tribal council fund by accepting grants or 

donations from any source, or by levying an annual assessment on each 

qualified voter of the Nooksack Indian Tribe of not less than twenty- 
five cents ($.25), and not more than five dollars ($5.00), and to 

require the performances of labor in lieu thereof; to levy taxes and 

license fees upon non-members doing business on tribal lands, subject 

to approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(h)  To promulgate ordinances for the purpose of safeguarding the peace and 

safety of the members of the Nooksack Indian Tribe and to establish 
courts for the adjudication of claims or disputes arising among the 

members of the tribe and for the trial and punishment of members of 
the tribe charged with the commission of offenses set forth in such 
ordinances.

(i)  To protect the public health and morals and to promote the public 
welfare by regulating the use and disposition of tribal property.

(j)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the tribal council 

itself and of other tribal agencies and officials.

(k)  To administer any funds or property within the control of the tribe, 
to make expenditures from available funds for public purposes, 

including salaries or remuneration of tribal officials or employees. 
Such salaries or remuneration shall be paid only for services actually 
authorized in a regular and legal manner and shall be by resolution 

duly passed by the tribal council to that effect and the amount so 

paid shall be a matter of public record at all times.

(1)  To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal, other than 

allotted lands, within the territory of the Nooksack Indian Tribe, 

subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior.

(m)  To provide by ordinance for the appointment of guardians for minors 

and mental incompetents, subject to the approval of the Secretary of 

the Interior.

(n)  To remove or exclude from the territory of the tribe non-members whose 

presence may be injurious to the peace, health, or welfare of the 

tribe.

Sect ion 2. Duties.

(a)  Tribal Court (Judicial Code).

(1)  It shall be the duty of the tribal council to provide, through 

ordinance, for the establishment of a tribal court.

(2)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all such petty offenses 

not falling within the exclusive jurisdiction of Federal or State 

courts as may be provided in the ordinances of the tribe.

(3)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all Indians on tribal 
lands and over all cases or controversies between Indians and 

non-Indians where such cases are brought before it by stipulation 
of both parties, provided that jurisdiction over Indian employees 

of the Indian Service shall be subject to rules and regulations 
prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  Tribal Pol ice Force.

It shall be the duty of the tribal council to establish by ordinance a 
tribal police force which shall have full jurisdiction upon the tribal 
lands as provided in Section 2(a)(2) above; the authority and duties 

of this police force may be outlined by the tribal council, and such 

police will be employees of the tribal council.

(c)  Tribal Lands.

(1)  It shall be the duty of the tribal council to pass rules and regu

lations to prevent unauthorized prospecting or mining of any kind 
upon tribal lands and to see that such rules and regulations are 

properly enforced.

(2)  The Tribal Council shall pass ordinances for the control and 

licensing of hunting and fishing upon the tribal lands, not con

flicting with any of the Federal and State authorities for protec

tion of game on tribal lands.

(d)  Public Welfare.

(1)  The tribal council at all times determines in a careful manner 
what constitutes just cause for charitable or financial aid or 

assistance to the indigent members of the tribe, and shall make 
proper provision for recommendation to proper agencies for relief.

(2)  The tribal council shall designate persons who shall administer 

charitable work within the tribe, conduct the solicitation and 

expenditure of charitable funds in a systematic manner, and pre

vent the abuse of charitable funds. It shall seek and cooperate 

with such charitable organizations and thereby render assistance 
or aid to the poor and needy.

(3)  The tribal council shall at all times endeavor to discuss and eli
minate the cause of indigence and assist in exercising wise and 

judicious supervision and management of the financial affairs of 

individual members of the tribe, to the end that need, privation, 
and financial distress may be entirely eliminated among the mem

bers of the tribes.

(4)  The tribal council shall pass necessary resolutions to promote and 
increase learning and education among the members of the tribe, 
studying present school systems, and recommending plans for 

improving them to the proper bureaus or departments.

(5)  The tribal council shall enter into negotiations with schools and 

procure for the members of the tribe the highest type of educa

tional facilities, to the end that younger members of the tribe 
shall have every possible advantage to attain a high degree of 

education.

(6)  The tribal council shall encourage and promote among the residents 

of the tribe by every practical means a proper system of social 
and home education in home economics, hygiene, home demonstra
tions, agronomy, and farm demonstrations with the cooperation of 
State, county, and Federal departments and agencies which seek to 

promote such social welfare and agricultural development work.

(e)  Loans.

(1)  A loan committee shall be created that shall act upon all applica
tions for loans under a revolving fund or reimbursable regulations 

for the purchase of property, stock, or equipment, or loans to 

Indians for the payment of tuition for higher education or trade 

schools.

(2)  The tribal council shall act in an advisory capacity upon all 

applications to the Superintendent for the withdrawal from the 
United States Treasury of trust funds, Nooksack benefits, or any 

other tribal funds.

7

(f)  Tribal Claims.

The tribal council shall make a thorough survey, research, investiga

tion, and study of the history and title of all lands which are not 
tribal in character, or which have been tribal in character in times 

past, and shall endeavor to re-establish the tribal equity, if any, in 
such lands, so as to obtain through proper channels just compensation 

for such lands, which it shall find to have been unlawfully removed 

from the present jurisdiction of the tribe and without just compen
sations.

(g)  Guardianship.

The tribal council shall pass all necessary ordinances whereby the 
rights of minors and incompetents shall be properly safeguarded, and 

shall see that the administration of such funds and other assets shall 

be for the exclusive benefit of such minors or incompetents. It 

shall be the duty of the tribal council to make semiannual reports 

concerning all such guardianship funds or assets and that such reports 

be matters of public record.

Section 3. Future Powers. The Nooksack Indian Tribal Council may exercise such 

powers as may in the future be delegated to the tribe by the Secretary of the 

Interior or by any other duly authorized official or agency of the government.

Section 4. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the 

Nooksack Indian Tribe but not expressly referred to in this constitution shall 

not be abridged by this article, but may be exercised by the people of the 
Nooksack Indian Tribe through the adoption of appropriate bylaws and constitu

tional amendments.

.ARTICLE VII - REFERENDUM

Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least one-third (1/3) of the 

qualified voters of the Nooksack Indian Tribe, a referendum shall be called by 
the tribal council within not less than ten (10) days nor more than thirty (30) 

days from the date of receipt of the petition on any enacted or proposed ordi
nance or resolution of the Nooksack Indian Tribal Council, and the vote of the 

majority of the qualified voters in such referendum shall be conclusive and 

binding on the tribal council, provided at least one-third (1/3) of the 

qualified voters cast ballots.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - LAND

 
 Section 1. Unallotted Lands. The unallotted lands of the Nooksack Indian Tribe 

and all lands which may be hereinafter acquired by or for the Nooksack Indian 

Tribe, shall be held as tribal lands forever.

Section 2. Unassigned Tribal Lands. Tribal lands which are not assigned may be 

used for public purposes of any sort. Such lands may also be leased by the 
tribal council, to members of the tribe, or to non-members according to law, and 

all proceeds of such leases shall accrue to the tribal treasury to be used for 
any other public purposes of the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 All members of the Nooksack Indian Tribe shall be accorded equal rights pursuant 
to tribal law. No member shall be denied any of the rights or guarantees 
enjoyed by non-Indian citizens under the Consitution of the United States, 

including, but not limited to, freedom of religion and conscience, freedom of 

speech, the right to orderly association or assembly, the right to petition for 
action or the redress of grievances, and due process of law.

The protection guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 1968 
(82 Stat.77), against actions of an Indian entity in the exercise of its powers 

of self-government shall apply to the members of the Nooksack Indian Tribe.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE NOOKSACK INDIAN TRIBE OF WASHINGTON

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside at all meetings of 
the tribal council. He shall have a vote only when a tie occurs.

Sect ion 2. In the absence of the regular chairman, the vice-chairman shall pre

side and he shall have all powers, privileges, and duties of the regular chair

man, and may cast a vote in the case of a tie.

Section 3. It shall be the duty of the tribal secretary to keep a true and 

accurate record of all matters affecting the tribal records and accounts, and to 

render a proper accounting of such records and statistics as are required by the

7

tribal council. He shall be present at all meetings of the tribal council and 

shall keep an accurate record of all tribal council proceedings which includes: 
Minutes of all special or regular meetings shall be in duplicate, the original 

to be filed at the Nooksack Tribal Office, and one (1) copy to be presented to 

the superintendent.

Section 4. The duties of the treasurer of the tribal council shall be as 

follows: He shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve, and safeguard all 

funds in the custody of the tribal council, whether they be tribal funds or 

special funds for which the tribal council is acting as trustee or custodian. 
He shall deposit all such funds in such bank or elsewhere as directed by the 

tribal council, and he shall keep an accurate record, filing same in the tribal 
council's office, and he shall report all receipts and expenditures and accounts 

and the nature of all funds in his possession or custody, once every six (6) 

months to the tribal council in writing, or at any time he is requested to do so 
by the tribal counciI.

(a)  He shall not disburse any tribal funds in his custody except when 

authorized by a motion duly passed and properly recorded by the tribal 

council.

(b)  He shall be present a*t all special or regular meetings of the tribal 

council and shall make a verbal report on the status of tribal funds, 

and furnish other necessary information as requested.

(d)  The books and records of the treasurer shall be audited at least once 

a year by a competent auditor employed by the tribal council or under 

the direction of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sect ion 5. There shall be a sergeant-at-arms and he will be appointed by the 

tribal council. It shall be his duty to be present at all meetings of the tri

bal council and to maintain order and decorum within the tribal council cham
bers: he shall serve all summonses emanating from the tribal council, and shall 

perform such other duties as may be designated by the tribal council. He shall 

have no voice or vote in the deliberations of the tribal council except when 
making reports or furnishing information requested by the tribal council.

/o
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEETINGS AND PROCEDURES

 
 Section 1. Immediately after the election of members of the tribal council, and 

said elected members are duly certified by the election board, the members shall 
assesmble at the Nooksack Tribal Office and organize for business and appoint 
one sergeant-at-arms.

Section 2. The tribal council shall meet regularly on the first Tuesday of each 
month. Regular meeting shall be held at the tribal office.

Section 3. Special meetings of the tribal council shall be held at such times as 

are designated by the chairman, and he shall ntoify the members at least twenty- 
four (24) hours before the date of such meeting.

Sect ion 4. At any special or regular meeting of the tribal council, five (5) 

members present shall constitute a quorum, and the tribal council may proceed 
to transact any business that may come before it.

Section 5. Special meetings of the tribal council shall also be held upon writ
ten request of either two (2) members of the tribal council or by petition 

signed by twenty-five (25) lega4 voters of the tribe. Such written request 

shall be filed with the chairman or the secretary of the tribal council, and he 
shall notify the tribal council members twenty-four (24) hours before the date 

of such tribal council meetings.

Sect ion 6. All sessions of the tribal council (except executive) shall be open 
to all members of the tribe. Balloting at all sessions shall be either by 

acclamation or by secret written ballot as the presiding officer shall direct.

Sect ion 7. The tribal council may, upon motion duly passed, go into executive 

sessions. At such sessions, all persons shall be excluded from the tribal coun

cil chamber, and any such person whose presence shall be required before the 

tribal council shall be designated by the chairman, and no other person shall be 
allowed to be present other than the members of the tribal council.

Section 8. The tribal council shall exercise care and caution to the end that a 
complete record is preserved of all acts of the tribal council and of all com

mittees appointed therefrom. Accurate copies of all such records shall be pre
served in the files of the tribal council and accurate copies of all necessary 

records shall be transmitted to such bureaus, departments, or elsewhere as may 

be required. Records maintained by the officers of the tribal council shall be 

the property of the Nooksack Indian Tribe and shall be promptly transmitted to 

new duly elected officers.

Section 9. Copies of all leases, contracts, deeds, or assignments and all other 
papers or documents pertaining to tribal lands of any nature shall be care

fully preserved by the tribal council, and insofar as it is possible, all other 

documents affecting the rights and equities of the tribe as a whole, or the 

individual members thereof, shall be kept and preserved in order that such 

information shall at all times be available to the tribal council and to the 

individual members of the tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE HI - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws, when ratified by a majority vote of the qualified 
voters of the Nooksack Indian tribe voting at an election called for that pur

pose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least thirty percent 
(30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, shall be submitted 

to the Secretary of the Interior, and if approved, shall be effective from the 

date of approval.

