 
 UNITED STATES DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR  
 
OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 
NORTHERN CHEYENNE TRIBE 
OF THE TONGUE RIVER 

RESERVATION


 
  
  
 APPROVED NOVEMBER 23, 1935 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1935 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE NORTHERN 
CHEYENNE TRIBE


Preamble

We, the members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe of the Tongue 
River Reservation in Montana, in order to establish a more unified 
tribal organization and to insure and promote the best interests of 
our society, industry, prosperity, and the general welfare of ourselves 
and our posterity do hereby establish this Constitution and Bylaws.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe under this Con
stitution and Bylaws shall extend to the territory within the con
fines of the Tongue River Reservation boundaries as established by 
Executive Order dated November 26,1884, under the administration 
of Chester A. Arthur and extended March 19, 1900, under the ad
ministration of William McKinley and to such other lands as may 
be hereafter added thereto by any law of the United States, except 
as otherwise provided by law. 
 
 

,

 
 Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe shall 

consist as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe as of January 1, 1935, 
provided that within one (1) year from the adoption and approval 
of this Constitution and Bylaws corrections may be made in said 
roll by the Tribal Council, subject to approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior.

(b)  All children born to any member of the Northern Cheyenne 
Tribe who is a resident of the Tongue River Reservation at the time 
of the birth of said children.

(c)  All children horn to any member of the Northern Cheyenne 
Tribe who is a nonresident of the Tongue River Reservation at the 
time of the birth of said children, provided said children are not 
less than one-half (%) degree of Indian Mood and shall have resided 
upon the reservation for a. continuous period of at least three (3) 
years or shall have been adopted by a majority vote of the Tribal 
Council.

Section 2. Any offspring resulting from the marriage hereafter 
performed between a member of the Tribe and a nonmember of any 
race, other than Indian or Caucasian, shall not be entitled to mem
bership in the Tribe.
35741—35 

(1)

Section 3. The Tribal Council shall have power to promulgate 
ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, cover
ing future membership including adoptions and the loss of 
membership.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe 
under this Constitution and Bylaws shall be a council which shall 
hereafter be known as “The Tribal Council of the Northern 
Cheyenne.”

Section 2. The Tribal Council shall consist of members elected 
from each of the following districts: Ashland, Birney, Busby, 
Muddy, and Lame Deer in the proportion of one member for each 
one-hundred (100) population and an additional member for each 
major fraction thereof. The present Tribal Council shall designate 
the boundaries of each district named herein prior to the election of 
the first Tribal Council and the Tribal Council thereafter shall have 
power to change the boundaries of the districts.

Section 3. The officers of the Tribal Council shall be a President 
who shall be nominated and elected by popular vote as hereinafter 
provided; a Vice President and a Sergeant at Arms elected by the 
Tribal Council from within its own number; and a Secretary and a 
Treasurer appointed by the Tribal Council from outside its number. 
The Secretary and the Treasurer shall have no vote. Other officers 
and committees shall be appointed as provided for in the duties of 
the President.

Section 4. The first election of the members of the Tribal Council 
and the President shall be called and supervised by the present Tribal 
Council within thirty (30) days after the approval of this Constitu
tion and Bylaws.

Section 5. The President and the members of the Tribal Council 
elected at the first election shall serve until the seating of a President 
and members of the Tribal Council in September 1936. Thereafter 
the President shall serve for four (4) years and the members of the 
Tribal Council shall serve for two (2) years.

Section 6. After the first election all elections for members of the 
Tribal Council and for the President shall be held on the first Tues
day in the month of September.

Article IV—Powers of the Tribal Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Tribal Council of the North
ern Cheyenne shall exercise the following powers, subject to any 
limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States and subject further to all express restrictions upon such powers 
contained in this Constitution and the attached Bylaws:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, 
on behalf of the Tribe, and to advise and consult with the representa
tives of the Interior Department on all activities of the Department 
that may affect the Tongue River Reservation.

(b)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe and its members, the 

choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets including 
minerals, gas, and oil, which may be authorized or executed by the 
Secretary of the Interior, the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, or 
any other authorized official or agency of government, provided that 
no tribal lands shall ever be leased for a period exceeding five (5) 
years, sold, or encumbered except for governmental purposes.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Northern Cheyenne Tribe prior to the submission of such estimates to 
the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To make assignments and leases of tribal land in conformity 

with Article IX of this Constitution.

(f)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Northern 
Cheyenne Tribe in accordance with the terms of a charter that may 
be issued to the Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior.

(g)  To appropriate for public purposes of the Tribe any avail
able funds within the exclusive control of the Tribal Council and, 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, to appropriate 
any other available tribal funds.

(h)  To levy taxes or assessments upon members of the Northern 
Cheyenne Tribe and to require the performance of community labor 
in lieu thereof, and to levy taxes or license fees, subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior, upon nonmembers doing business 
within the reservation.

(i)  To exclude from the restricted lands of the Tongue River 
Reservation persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under 
ordinances which shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(j)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct 
of members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe and any other person 
or persons coming within the jurisdiction of the reservation, and 
providing for the maintenance of law and order and the admin
istration of justice by establishing a reservation court and defining 
its duties and powers.

(k)  To purchase, under condemnation proceedings in courts of 
competent jurisdiction, land or other property needed for public 
purposes, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(1)  To protect and preserve the property, wildlife, and natural 
resources of the Tribe and to regulate the conduct of trade and the 
use and disposition of property upon the reservation, provided 
that any ordinance directly affecting nonmembers of the Tribe 
shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(m)  To cultivate and preserve native arts, crafts, culture, and 

(n)  To administer charity and to protect the health and general 

Indian ceremonials.

welfare of the Tribe.

(o)  To charter subordinate organizations of members of the 

Tribe for economic purposes.

(p)  To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal, 
other than allotted lands, within the territory of the Tongue River

Reservation, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, and 
to consult with the Examiner of Inheritance in all heirship find
ings before they are submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for 
determination.

(q)  To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe 

and of nonmembers married into the Tribe.

(r)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinance or resolution subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(s)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Council, 

other tribal agencies, and tribal officials of the reservation.

(t)  To delegate to subordinate boards or officers or to cooperative 
associations which are open to all members of the Tribe any of the 
foregoing powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by 
virtue of such delegated powers.

Section 2. Future Powers.—The Tribal Council of the Northern 
Cheyenne may exercise such further powers as may in the future 
be delegated to the Council by members of the Tribe or by the 
Secretary of the Interior or any other duly authorized official or 
agency of the State or Federal Government.

Section 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Northern Cheyenne Tribe but not expressly referred 
to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this article, but may 
be exercised by the people of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe through 
the adoption of appropriate bylaws and constitutional amendments.
Section 4. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance which 
under subsections (g), (h), (i), (j), (k), (1), (p), and (r) of 
Section 1, Article IV, of this Constitution is subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent 
of the Reservation, who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, ap
prove or disapprove same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secre
tary of the Interior, who may within ninety (90) days from the date 
of enactment rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause 
by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him within ten (10) days after its enact
ment, he shall advise the Tribal Council of his reasons therefor. If 
these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by a majority 
vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the In
terior, who may within ninety (90) days from the date of its 
enactment approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance 
or resolution shall become effective.

Article V—Bill of Rights

Section 1. All members of the Tribe shall be accorded equal op
portunities to participate in the economic resources and activities 
of the Tribe.

Section 2. All members of the Tribe may enjoy, without hin
drance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, and 
association as guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States.

Article VI—Elections

Section 1. All members of the Tribe who have attained the age 
of twenty-one (21) years shall have the right to vote at all reserva
tion elections.

Section 2. All elections (except special elections which may be 
called by the Tribal Council) shall be held on the first Tuesday in 
the month of September. The places of voting shall be designated 
by the Tribal Council.

Section 3. (a) The President shall be nominated in the following 
manner: Each district shall appoint the same number of electors as 
they have members on the Tribal Council and these electors shall 
nominate one or more candidates for the office of President.

(b)  The members of the Tribal Council shall be nominated by the 
districts in the following manner: Each district shall nominate its 
candidates for membership in the Tribal Council in such manner as 
the Tribal Council shall designate.

(c)  The list of qualified candidates for President nominated by 
the electors and the list of qualified candidates for Tribal Council 
members nominated by the districts shall be submitted to the Secre
tary of the Tribal Council who shall post the lists of these qualified 
candidates in the several districts at least three (3) weeks before 
the date of election.

(d)  All nominations and elections shall be held in accordance with 

ordinances adopted by the Tribal Council.

Article VII—Removal from Office

Section 1. The President, members, and other officers of the Tribal 
Council shall be removed from office on impeachment for conviction 
of bribery, felony, or a misdemeanor involving dishonesty. No 
person is to be impeached except by a two-thirds (2/3) affirmative 
vote of the members of the Council present after the accused has 
had due notice of the charges against him and an opportunity to 
be heard in his own defense.

Section 2. Any complaint against the President, a member, or 
officer of the Tribal Council must be in writing and sworn to by 
the complainant.

Section 3. Vacancies.— (a) If the office of President is declared 
vacant it shall be filled temporarily by the Vice President and the 
Tribal Council shall within sixty (60) days after the vacancy occurs 
call for nomination and election of a President to fill the vacancy 
in the manner as provided in Article VI.

(b)  If the office of a member of the Tribal Council becomes vacant 
the Tribal Council shall, at its first meeting thereafter, call an elec
tion within the district in which the vacancy occurs. Such election 
shall be held within thirty (30) days after the said Council meeting.

Article VIII—Referendum

Section 1. Upon a petition, signed by at least ten (10) percent 
of the registered voters from each district, a referendum may be 
demanded on any tribal adoption of a person or the elimination of 
a person from the tribal roll, or on any proposed or enacted ordi
nance or resolution of the Tribal Council and the vote of the majority 
of the qualified voters voting in such referendum shall be conclusive 
and binding upon the Tribal Council, provided at least thirty (30) 
percent of the eligible voters shall vote in such referendum.

Article IX—Land

Section 1. Allotted Lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship 
lands, within the Tongue River Reservation shall continue to be 
held as heretofore by their present owners. It is recognized that 
under existing law such lands may be inherited by the heirs of the 
present owner, whether or not they are members of the Northern 
Cheyenne Tribe. Likewise, it is recognized that under existing 
law the Secretary of the Interior may, in his discretion, remove 
restrictions upon such land, upon application by the Indian owner, 
whereupon the land will become subject to State taxes and may be 
mortgaged or sold. The right of the individual Indian to hold or 
to part with his land, as under existing law, shall not be abrogated 
by anything contained in this Constitution, but the owner of re
stricted land may, with the approval of the Secretary of the In
terior, voluntarily convey his land to the Northern Cheyenne Tribe 
either in exchange for a money payment or in exchange for an 
assignment covering the same land or other land, as hereinafter 
provided.

Section 2. Tribal Lands.—The unallotted lands of the Tongue 
River Reservation and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by 
the Northern Cheyenne Tribe or by the United States in trust for 
the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, shall be held as tribal lands and no 
part of such land shall be mortgaged, sold, or ceded. Tribal lands 
shall not be allotted to individual Indians but may be assigned to 
members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, or leased, or otherwise 
used by the Tribe, as hereinafter provided.

Section 3. Leasing of Tribal Lands.—Tribal lands may be leased 
by the Tribal Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, for such periods of time as are permitted by law.

In leasing of the tribal lands, preference shall be given, first, to 
Indian cooperative associations and, secondly, to individual Indians 
who are members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe. No lease of tribal 
land to a nonmember shall be made by the Tribal Council unless it 
shall appear that no Indian cooperative association or individual 
member of the tribe is able and willing to use the land and to pay a 
reasonable fee for such use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the Tribal 
Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, in the 
same manner and upon the same terms as leases.

Section 4. Grant of “Standardn Assignments.—In any assign
ment of tribal lands which are now owned by the Tribe or which may 

be hereafter purchased for the Tribe by the United States, or pur
chased by the Tribe out of tribal funds, preference shall be given, 
first, to members of the Tribe who have been born since June 3, 1926 
(Allotment Act), and who have reached legal age and desire to 
establish a home but have no land or interests in land; and, secondly, 
to heads of families which have no allotted lands or interests in 
allotted lands but shall have already received assignments consisting 
of less than an economic unit of agricultural land or other land or 
interests in land of equal value. Such economic unit shall be deter
mined from time to time by the Tribal Council. No allotted member 
of the Tribe who may hereafter have the restrictions upon his land 
removed and whose land may thereafter be alienated shall be entitled 
to receive an assignment of land as a landless Indian.

The Tribal Council may, if it sees fit, charge a reasonable fee based 
upon the value of the land at the time of approval of an assignment 
made under this section.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary pur
pose of establishing homes for landless Indians, and shall be known 
as “standard ” assignments.

Section 5. Tenure of “Standard” Assignments.—If any member 
of the Tribe holding a standard assignment of land shall, for a period 
of two (2) years, tail to use the land so assigned or shall use such 
land for any unlawful purpose his assignment may be canceled by the 
Tribal Council after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, and 
the said land may be reassigned in accordance with the provisions of 
Section 4 of this Article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a “standard” assignment his 
heirs, or other individuals designated by him, by will, or written 
request, shall have a preference in the reassignment of the land, pro
vided such persons are members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe who 
would be eligible to receive a “standard” assignment.

Section 6. Grant of “Exchange” Assignments.—Assignments 
under this section shall be known as “exchange” assignments. Any 
member of the tribe who owns an allotment or any share of heirship 
land or patent-in-fee land may voluntarily transfer his interest in 
such land to the Tribe in exchange for an assignment to the same land 
or other land of equal value. If the assignee prefers, he may receive, 
in lieu of a specific tract of land, a proportionate share in a larger 
grazing unit.

Section 7. Leading of “Exchange” Assignments.—“Exchange” 
assignments may be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian 
cooperative associations, to individual members of the Tribe, or, if 
no individual Indian or Indian cooperative association is able and 
willing to rent the land at a reasonable fee, such assignments may be 
leased to non-Indians, in the same manner as allotted lands.

Section 8. Inheritance of “Exchange” Assignments.—Upon the 
death of the holder of any exchange assignment, such land shall be 
reassigned by the Tribal Council to his heirs or devisees, subject to the 
following conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who is 
not a member of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, except that a life 
assignment may be made to the surviving widower, widow, or child 
of the holder of such assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
already holds more than three hundred and twenty (320) acres of 
grazing land, or other land or interests in land of equal value, either 
under allotment or under assignment.

(c)  Such land may not be subdivided among heirs or devisees into 
units too small for convenient management. No area of grazing land 
shall be subdivided into units smaller than one hundred and sixty 
(160) acres, and no area of irrigated land shall be subdivided into 
units smaller than ten (10) acres, except that land used for buildings 
or other improvements may be divided to suit the convenience of the 
parties. Where it is impossible to divide the land properly among 
the eligible heirs or devisees, the Tribal Council shall issue to such 
heirs or devisees grazing permits or other interests in tribal lands of 
the same value as the assignment of the decedent.

(d)  If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the provi
sions of Section 4 of this Article.

Section 9. Inheritance of Improvements.—Improvements of any 
character made upon assigned lands may be bequeathed to and in
herited by members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe under such regu
lations as the Tribal Council shall provide. No permanent improve
ments shall be removed without the consent of the Council.

Section 10. Exchange of Assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe by com
mon consent in such manner as the Tribal Council shall designate.

Section 11. Use of Unassigned Tribal Land,—Tribal land which 
is not leased or assigned, including tribal timber reserves, shall be 
managed by the Tribal Council subject to the approval of the Secre
tary of the Interior, for the benefit of the members of the entire Tribe, 
and any cash income derived from such land shall accrue to the bene
fit of the tribe as a whole.

Section 12. Purchase of Land by Tribe.—Tribal funds may be 
used, with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire land, 
under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within the Tongue River Reservation or adjacent to the 
boundaries thereof excepting allotments not in heirship status may 
be purchased by or for the Northern Cheyenne Tribe.

(b)  Land owned by any member of the Tribe who desires to leave 
the reservation permanently may be purchased by the Tribe, under 
such terms as may be agreed upon.

Section 13. Method of Making Assignments.—Applications for as
signments shall be filed with the Secretary of the Council and shall 
be in writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons apply
ing for the land and as accurate a description of the land desired as 
the circumstances will permit. Notices of all applications received by 
the Secretary shall be posted by him in the Agency Office and in at 
least three conspicuous places in the district in which the land is 
located for not less than twenty (20) days before action is taken by 
the Council. Any member of the Tribe wishing to oppose the grant
ing of an assignment shall do so in writing, setting forth his objections 
to be filed with the Secretary of the Council, and may, if he so desires, 
appear before the Council to present evidence. The Secretary of the 
Council shall furnish the Superintendent or other officer in charge of 

the Agency a complete record of all action taken by the Council on 
applications for assignment of land and a complete record of assign
ments shall be kept in the Agency Office and shall be open for inspec
tion by members of the Tribe. Forms for assignments shall be pre
pared by the Tribal Council, subject to approval by the Secretary of 
the Interior.

Article X—Amendments

This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Tribe, voting at an election called for 
that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least 
thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, 
but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been ap
proved by the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be the duty of the 
Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed amend
ment at the request of two-thirds (2/3) of the Tribal Council, or upon 
presentation of a petition signed by one-third (1/3) of the qualified 
voters of the Tribe.
 
 

BYLAWS

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The President may, if he desires, preside over all meet
ings of the Tribal Council. He shall, with the advice and consent of 
the Tribal Council, appoint delegates, representatives, committees, or 
other officers as are deemed proper from time to time. He shall have 
power to fill all vacancies, not otherwise provided for in this Consti
tution and Bylaws, that may occur when the Tribal Council is not in 
session and then he shall submit the names of such appointees at the 
following session. It shall be his duty to convene the Tribal Council 
for extra sessions. It shall be his duty to see that all enactments, 
orders, and resolutions are properly executed. He shall have the fur
ther right of conferring with any Federal or State official on any 
matters that affect the welfare of the Tribe. And he shall also have 
the further right to confer with the several district councils.

Section 2. The Vice President shall act as presiding officer of the 
Tribal Council whenever the President does not so preside. When
ever the President does not preside he may delegate any or all of his 
lowers to the Vice President. In the event that the office of the 
President becomes vacant, the Vice President shall become temporary 
President and shall perform the duties and execute the powers of 
President until the office of President is filled.

Section 3. The Tribal Council Secretary shall keep a full report 
of all proceedings of each regular and special meeting of the Tribal 
Council and shall perform such other duties of like nature as the 
Council shall from time to time by resolution provide, and shall 
transmit copies of the minutes of each meeting to the President of 
the Council, to the Superintendent of the Reservation, to the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, and to all recognized District Councils 
of the reservation.

Section 4. The Tribal Council Treasurer shall be the custodian of 
all moneys which come under the jurisdiction or control of the Tri
bal Council of the Northern Cheyenne. He shall pay out money 

in accordance with the orders and resolutions of the council. He 
shall keep accounts of all receipts and disbursements and shall make 
written reports of same to the Tribal Council at each regular and 
special meeting. He shall be bonded in such an amount as the 
Council by resolution shall provide, such bond to be approved by 
the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The books of the Tribal Coun
cil Treasurer shall be subject to inspection or audit by the direction 
of the Council or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Section 5. The Sergeant at Arms shall be present at all regular 
and extra sessions and shall keep order in such meetings and shall 
perform such other duties as the Tribal Council may by resolution 
provide.

Article II.—Qualifications

Section 1. In order for a person to be eligible for the office of 
President of the Tribal Council he must be at least thirty (30) years 
of age and a member, by blood, of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe.

Section 2. Any person elected as a member of the Tribal Council 
must be at least twenty-one (21) years of age and a member of the 
Northern Cheyenne Tribe.

Article III—Certification

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall appoint an election board 
which shall certify to the election of all members elected and this 
shall be done within five (5) days after the election.

Section 2. (Oath) I,_________________ , do solemnly swear
that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States 
against all enemies; carry out faithfully and impartially the duties 
of my office to the best of my ability; promote and protect the best 
interests of my Tribe, the Northern Cheyenne, in accordance with 
this Constitution and Bylaws.

This oath of office shall be administered by a Notary Public or 

Judge.

Article IV—Salaries

Section 1. The salaries of the members or other officers of the 
Tribal Council of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe may be paid out of 
available funds within the exclusive control of the Tribal Council 
or out of any other available tribal funds with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior in accordance with ordinances duly en
acted, provided that no Tribal Council shall enact any ordinance in
creasing the salaries of councilmen during the existing term of office.

Article V—Meetings and Procedure

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall assemble on the first Monday 

after the 15th of each month.

Section 2. A majority of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the 
Tribal Council must be present in order to constitute a quorum to 
do business.

Section 3. Extra sessions may be called by the President or by 
five (5) members of the Tribal Council in writing to the President 
and when so called two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Tribal 
Council must be present to constitute a quorum, and the Tribal 
Council shall have power to transact business as in regular meetings.
Section 4. The presiding officer in meetings of the Tribal Council 

shall vote only in the case of a tie.

Section 5. Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concur
rence of the Tribal Council may be necessary (except on the ques
tion of adjournment) shall be presented to the President of the 
Tribal Council, and before the same shall take effect it shall be ap
proved by him or being disapproved by him may become effective 
by being repassed by two-thirds (%) vote of the Tribal Council.

Article VI—Adoption of Constitution and Bylaws

Section 1. This Constitution and the attached Bylaws when ap
proved by a majority of the adult voters of the Northern Cheyenne 
Tribe voting in a special election called by the Secretary of the 
Interior in which at least 30 percent of the eligible voters vote, shall 
be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for approval and 
shall be effective from the date of such approval.

Certification of Adoption

Pursuant to an order, approved October 11, 1935, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and Bylaws were 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Northern Cheyenne 
Tribe of the Tongue River Reservation and were on November 2, 
1935, duly passed by a vote of 394 for, and 53 against, in an election 
in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, 
in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 
1935 (Public No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Eugene Fisher, Sr., 

Chairman, of Election Board.

Rufus Wallowing,

Chairman of Tribal Council.
Eugene Littlecoyote, 

Secretary of the Tribal Council.
W. R. Centerwall,

Superintendent.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached constitution and bylaws of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe.
All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution 

and bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Northern Chey
enne Tribe.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and bylaws.

Approval recommended November 15, 1935:

John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

[seal] 

Washington, D. C., November 23, 1935.

Harold L. Ickes,
Secretary of the Interior.

