 
 AMENDED 
 
CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE

NORTHERN CHEYENNE TRIBE

OF THE

NORTHERN CHEYENNE INDIAN RESERVATION

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe of the Northern Cheyenne Indian 
Reservation in Montana, in order to establish a more unified tribal organization and to insure and 
promote the best interests of our society, industry, prosperity, and the general welfare of ourselves 
and our posterity do hereby establish this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The jurisdiction of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe under this Constitution and Bylaws shall 
extend to the territory within the confines of the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation 
boundaries as established by Executive Order dated November 26, 1884, under the administration 
of Chester A. Arthur and extended March 19, 1900, under the administration of William 
McKinley and to such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto by any law of the United 
States, except as otherwise provided by law.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1.  The membership of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe shall consist of as follows:

(a)  All persons of Northern Cheyenne Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll as of January 1, 1935, provided that by January 1, 1962, corrections shall be 
made in said roll by the Tribal Council, subject to approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(b)  Each person of one-half (1/2) or more Northern Cheyenne Indian blood, regardless

This document sets forth the text of the original Constitution and Bylaws adopted in 1935, as amended 

amendments adopted in 1960 and 1996.
 
 

 
 
 
 or residence, born heretofore or hereafter to any member or descendant of a member of 
the Northern Cheyenne Tribe whose name was or is on the census roll referred to in 
Section 1(a) shall automatically be entitled to membership in the Northern Cheyenne 
Tribe.

All children heretofore bom to any member of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe who 
(c) 
was a resident of the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation at the time of the birth of 
said children.

Section 2.  The Tribal Council shall have power to promulgate ordinances, subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior, covering future membership including adoptions and the 
loss of membership.
 
 

ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY AND OFFICERS

 
 Section 1.  The governing body of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe under this Constitution 
and Bylaws shall be a council which shall hereafter be known as "The Tribal Council of the 
Northern Cheyenne."

Section 2.  The Tribal Council shall consist pf eleven members holding the following 

seats:

One at-large seat held by the Vice President of the Tribe, except when the Vice 

(a) 
President is presiding over the Tribal Council due to the absence of the President

Five sears allocated one each to the Reservation districts of Ashland, Birney, 

(b) 
Busby, Muddy and Lame Deer.

Five seats allocated among the five districts in accordance with the percentage of 
(c) 
the Tribal membership associated with each district, with fractional seats being rounded 
off to. the. nearest whole number. The allocation of these five seats shall be determined 
for the regular election of 1996, and redetermined for the regular election held every four 
years thereafter. By ordinance, the Tribal Council shall establish standards and methods 
for the implementation of such allocations.

(d) 

The Tribal Council shall have power to change the boundaries of the districts.

The members of the Tribal Council holding the ten seats allocated among the
(e) 
districts shall be selected through district primary elections followed by a general election
conducted at-large, as provided in Article VI, Section 4. The Vice President holding the
at-large seat shall be selected through a primary election followed by a general election, 
both conducted at-large as provided in Article VI, Section 3.

Section 3. The officers of the Tribe shall be a President and Vice President who shall 

 be elected by popular vote as hereinafter provided: a Sergeant at Arms elected by the Tribal 
 Council from within its own number, and a Secretary and a Treasurer appointed by the Tribal 
 Council from outside its number. The Secretary and the Treasurer shall have no vote. Other 
officers and committees shall be appointed as provided in Article I. Section 1 of the Bylaws.

Section 4. All regular elections for President, Vice President and Tribal Council seats 
allocated to Reservation districts shall be held in even numbered years on the date set for regular 
Congressional elections, including the regular election of 1996 which shall be held on Tuesday, 
November 5, 1996. The President and Vice President shall serve for four years, and the members 
of the Tribal Council holding the ten district seats shall serve for four years in staggered terms, 
provided that in the regular election of 1996 five members of the Tribal Council shall be elected 
for two-year terms, as set forth in Article VI, Section 4(d). After each regular election for the 
Tribal Council, the Council shall appoint the Sergeant at Arms. Secretary and Treasurer, each of 
whom shall serve at the pleasure of the Council.

Section 5. It is contemplated that the President, Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer, 
and all members of the Tribal Council ("Tribal Officials") will serve on a full-time basis, and will 
receive therefor a salary commensurate with the responsibilities of office and other appropriate 
emoluments of office, to the extent prudent in light of available Tribal financial resources. No 
Tribal Official may receive additional compensation or other financial benefits for: serving on 
any committee of the Tribal Council; serving on boards, commissions or bodies governing or 
managing instrumentalities or programs of the Tribe; or undertaking while in office tasks which 
ould ordinarily be performed on behalf of the Tribe or an instrumentality or program of the 

Tribe by an employee or contractor.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers. The Tribal Council of the Northern Cheyenne shall 
exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the applicable statutes of 
the United States and subject further to all express restrictions upon such powers contained in this 
Constitution and the attached Bylaws:

To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, on behalf of the 
(a) 
Tribe, and to advise and consult with the representatives of the Interior Department on all 
activities of the Department that may affect the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation.

To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement of the rights of the 
(b) 
Northern Cheyenne Tribe and its members, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

To approve or prevent any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, 

(c) 
interests in lands or other tribal assets, including minerals, gas and oil.

(d) 

To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation estimates

or Federal projects for the benefit of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe prior to the submission 
of such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

To engage in any business that will further the economic well-being of the 
(e) 
members of the Tribe and to undertake any economic activity of any nature whatever not 
inconsistent with law or any of the provisions of this Constitution.

To administer any funds within the control of the Tribe; to make expenditures 
(f) 
from available funds for tribal purposes, including salaries and expenses of tribal officials 
or employees. All expenditures of tribal funds under control of the Tribal Council shall 
be by resolution duly approved by a majority of the Tribal Council in legal session and 
the amounts so expended shall be a matter of public record at all times.

The Tribal Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, or his 
authorized representative, shall prepare annual budget requests for the advancement to the 
control of the Tribe such money as is now or may hereafter be deposited to the credit of 
the Tribe in the United States Treasury or which may hereafter be appropriated for the 
use of the Tribe.

To levy taxes or assessments upon members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe and 
(g) 
to require the performance of community labor in lieu thereof, and to levy taxes or license 
fees, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, upon nonmembers doing business 
within the Reservation. 

.

To exclude from the restricted lands of the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation 
(h) 
persons not legally entitled to reside therein, under ordinances which shall be subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(i) 
To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of members of the Northern Cheyenne 
Tribe and any other person or persons coming within the jurisdiction of the reservation, 
and providing for the maintenance of law and order arid the administration of justice by 
establishing a reservation court and defining its duties and powers.

To purchase, under condemnation proceedings in courts of competent jurisdiction, 
(j) 
land or other property needed for public purposes, subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior.

To protect and preserve the property, wildlife, and natural resources of the Tribe 
(k) 
and to regulate the conduct of trade and- the use and disposition of property upon the 
reservation, provided that any ordinance directly affecting nonmembers of the Tribe shall 
be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(1) 

To cultivate and preserve native arts, crafts, culture, and Indian ceremonials.

(m) 

To administer charity and to protect the health and general welfare of the Tribe,

To establish subordinate organizations of members of the Tribe for economic 

(n) 
purposes.

To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal, other than allotted lands, 
(o) 
within the territory of the Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation, subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, and to consult with the Examiner of Inheritance in all heirship 
findings before they are submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for determination.

To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe and of nonmembers 

(p) 
married into the Tribe.

To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and mental incompetents 

(q) 
by ordinance or resolution subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

To adopt resolutions regulating the procedures of the Council, other tribal agencies,

(r) 
and tribal officials of the reservation.

To delegate to subordinate boards or officers or to cooperative associations which 
(s) 
are open to all members of the Tribe any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to 
review any action taken by virtue of such delegated powers.

Section 2. Future Powers. The Tribal Council of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe may 
exercise such future powers as may in the future be given to the Council by members of the 
Tribe through the adoption of appropriate Bylaws and Constitutional amendments.

Section 3. Reserved Powers. Any right and powers heretofore vested in the Northern 
Cheyenne Tribe but not expressly referred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this 
article, but may be exercised by the people of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe through the. adoption 
of appropriate Bylaws and Constitutional amendments._________________________________

Section 4. Manner of Review. Any resolution or ordinance which pursuant to this 
Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the 
Superintendent of the Reservation within ten (10) days of enactment by the Tribal Council, and 
the Superintendent shall, within ten (10) days after receipt, approve or disapprove same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become 
effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to 
the Secretary of the Interior, who may within ninety (90) days from the date of enactment rescind 
the said ordinance or resolution for any cause by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or resolution submitted to him within 
(10) days after its receipt, he shall advise the Tribal Council of his reasons therefor. If these

reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or 
resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who may within ninety (90) days from the date of its 
enactment approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall become 
effective.
 
 

ARTICLE V - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1.  All members of the Tribe shall be accorded equal opportunities to 

participate in the economic resources and activities of the Tribe.

Section 2. 

All members of the Tribe may enjoy, without hindrance, freedom of 
worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, and association as guaranteed by the Constitution 
of the United States.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. 

All members of the Tribe eighteen (18) years of age or over shall have the 
right to vote at all reservation elections, except when the Federal law requires the voter to be 
twenty-one (21) years of age or over.

Section 2. 

Election Ordinances. Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and 
Bylaws, all elections and other membership votes, whether primary, regular, special, referendum, 
or other election or vote, shall be conducted in accordance with such ordinances and resolutions 
as may be adopted by the Tribal Council.

Section 3. 

Election of President and Vice President Candidates for President and 
Vice President shall be determined, and the President and Vice President shall be elected in at- 
large general elections, as follows:

A person desiring to run for President or Vice President shall file a Declaration 
(a) 
of Candidacy which certifies the intent to run for the office and the possession of all 
qualifications far the office, and shall pay a $200 filing fee. For each regular election for 
President or Vice President after the 1996 election, the Tribal Council may adjust the
filling fee to account for inflation or other factors. Any person qualifying for a general 
election for President or Vice President by write-in vote in a primary election shall 
promptly file a Declaration of Candidacy and pay the filing fee.

If more than two qualified persons file to run for President or for Vice President, 
(b) 
there shall be a primary election among such persons, conducted at large and held at least 
30 days before the general election. Write-in voting shall be permitted in the primary. 
The two top vote-getters in the primary shall be the only candidates for such office in the 
general election, provided that if more than two persons tie for top vote-getter, or if there 
is one top vote-getter and a tie for second place, all such persons shall be the candidates. 
Write-in voting shall not be permined in such general election. If a candidate dies,

withdraws or is disqualified prior to the general election, the candidates shall be 
redetermined on the basis of the primary results without considering votes cast for the 
former candidate, provided chat if this yields less than two candidates, write-in voting 
shall be permitted in such general election.

If no more than two qualified persons file to run for President or for Vice 
(c) 
President, there shall be no primary election for such office. The person(s) who filed for 
such office shall be the only candidate(s) for such office in the general election. Write-in 
voting shall be permitted in such general election.

On Tuesday, November 5, 1996, and on the date set for regular Congressional 
(d) 
elections every four years thereafter, there shall be regular elections for President and 
Vice President. The top vote-getter in every regular election shall be elected for a four- 
year term.

Section 4. 

Election of Council Candidates for the ten Tribal Council sears allocated 
among the Reservation districts shall be determined, and the Council members shall be elected 
in at-large general elections, as follows:

A person desiring to run for a Tribal Council seat allocated to a district shall file 
(a) 
a Declaration of Candidacy which certifies the intent to run and the possession of all 
qualifications for the office, and shall pay a $50 filing fee. For each regular election for 
the Tribal Council after the 1996 election, the Tribal Council may adjust the filing fee to 
account for inflation or other factors. Any person qualifying for a general election for the 
Tribal Council by write-in vote in a primary election shall promptly file a Declaration of 
Candidacy and pay the filing fee.

If the number of qualified persons filing to run for the Tribal Council from a 
(b) 
district is more than twice the number of open Council seats allocated to the district, there ' 
shall be a primary election among such persons, conducted within the district and held, at 
least 30 days before the general election. Only the voters of the district may vote in the 
primary. Write-in voting shall be permitted in the primary. In descending order of votes 
received, the top vote-getters in the district primary shall be included n the general 
election as the only candidates for the open seat(s) in the district, until the number of such 
included candidates equals twice the number of such open seat(s); provided that if there 
is a tie for lowest vote-getter among such persons, the tied persons shall be included 
among the candidates. Write-in voting shall not be permitted in such general election. 
If a candidate dies, withdraws or is disqualified prior to the general election, the 
candidates for the open seat(s) in the district shall be redetermined on the basis of the 
primary results without considering votes cast for the former candidate, provided that if 
this yields a number of candidates which is less than twice the number of such open 
seat(s), write-in voting shall be permitted in such general election.

(c) 

If the number of qualified persons filing to run for the Tribal Council from a

district is no more than twice the number of open Council seats allocated to the district, 
there shall be no primary election for such seat(s). The person(s) who filed for such 
seat(s) shall be the only candidate(s) for such seat(s) in the general election. Write-in 
voting shall be permitted in such general election.

On Tuesday, November 5, 1996, there shall be a regular election to fill the ten 
(d) 
Tribal Council seats allocated among the districts. The top vote-getter among the 
candidates for the seat(s) allocated to a district shall be considered elected to the seat 
allocated to the district under Article III, Section 2(b) and shall serve a four-year term. 
The other five successful Council candidates in that election shall be considered elected 
to the seats allocated under Article III, Section 2(c) and shall each serve a two-year term.

On the date set for regular Congressional elections in 1998, and on the comparable 
(e) 
date every two years thereafter, there shall be a regular election to fill five open Council 
seats, each for a four-year term.

In every regular and special election for Tribal Council, the top vote-getter(s) 
(f) 
among the candidates for open Council seat(s) allocated to a district shall, in descending 
order of votes received, be considered elected to such seat(s) until the open seat(s) have 
thereby been filled. 

.

Section 5. Miscellaneous Election Rules.

A person may not simultaneously file Declarations of Candidacy for more than one 
(a) 
position. A person may not be listed as a candidate for more than one position in the 
general elections. If a person qualifies as a candidate for more than one position in the 
general elections, such person promptly shall advise the Tribal Secretary as to the single 
position for which such person is to be listed as a candidate in such elections.

(b)  Lists of all persons running in elections, whether primary or general, for President
Vice President or the Tribal Council, shall-be posted by the Secretary in each of the 
Reservation districts at least three weeks before the date of the election.

No person may simultaneously hold more than one elected office. While holding 
(c) 
an elected office a person may run for a second office, provided that if such person is 
elected, the first office shall become vacant when such person is sworn in to the second 
office. While employed or retained by the Tribe or an instrumentality of the Tribe a 
person may run for office, provided that, if elected, such person shall resign from such 
employment or position.

In all elections for President. Vice President or the Tribal Council other than 
(d) 
primary elections, tie votes shall be resolved by a public drawing of lots by the Tribal 
Secretary.

If a person who is elected to office in any regular or special election dies, 
(e) 
withdraws or is disqualified before being sworn in to the office, candidates for the office 
shall be redetermined and a general election shall be held in a manner which, in rhe 
judgment of the Tribal Council, is most appropriate under the circumstances and in light 
of the policies underlying Section 3 or 4 above, as the case may be. The decision of the 
Tribal Council shall be final and not subject to judicial review in any court.

A person elected as President, Vice President, or Tribal Council member shall be 
(f) 
elected for the term of office specified in this Constitution and Bylaws and until his or 
her successor is sworn into office.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - REMOVAL FROM OFFICE, FILLING VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Forfeiture of Office.

Any officer or councilman found guilty of a felony in any tribal, county, State or 
(a) 
Federal court shall, automatically be removed from office and may not stand for election 
for three (3) years thereafter.

Any officer or councilman found guilty of a misdemeanor involving moral 
(b) 
turpitude in any court shall automatically be removed from office, but such member may 
stand for nomination and re-election.

Section 2. Removal from Office. Any officer or councilman who shall fail to 
perform the duties assigned to him or shall be guilty of gross neglect may be removed by a two- 
thirds (2/3) vote of the Tribal Council, after affording the accused member a fair opportunity to 
be heard in his own defense. The decision of the Tribal Council shall be final.

Section 3. 

Any complaint against the President, a member or officer of the Tribal 

Council must be in writing and sworn to by the complainant.

Section 4.... Filling Vacancies in Office. If the office of President or Vice President, 
or a seat on the Tribal Council allocated to a Reservation district, becomes vacant due to death, 
resignation, removal, or other cause, the Tribal Council shall schedule a special election to fill 
the vacancy for the remainder of the term of office as follows:

In the case of a vacancy in the office of President or Vice President, candidates 
(a) 
for office shall be determined and the special election shall be held in accordance with 
Section 3 of Article VI. If the office of President is vacant, the Vice President shall serve 
as acting President in the interim. If the offices of both President and Vice President are 
vacant simultaneously, the Tribal Council shall appoint from within its own number an 
acting President who shall serve in the interim. While the Vice President or appointed 
Tribal Council member serves as acting President, such person’s seat on the Tribal 
Council shall be considered temporarily vacant, and upon completion of such service such

person shall resume occupancy of the seat.

In the case of a vacancy in one of the ten seats on the Tribal Council allocated 
(b) 
among the districts, candidates shall be determined and the special election shall be held 
in accordance with Section 4 of Article VI.

An election to fill a vacancy shall occur no later than 90 days after the occurrence 
(c) 
of the vacancy, provided that, if the vacancy in office occurs when there is less than 180 
days remaining in rhe term of office, the Tribal Council in its discretion may choose not 
to hold the election. The decision of the Tribal Council shall be final and not subject to 
judicial review in any court If the Tribal Council so chooses not to hold an election as 
to a vacancy in a Tribal Council seat allocated to a district, the Council promptly shall 
publicly solicit the filing of Declarations of Candidacy by qualified persons desiring to 
be appointed to the seat for the remainder of its term. No filing fee shall be required. 
Promptly after the close of such filing period, by majority vote the Tribal Council shall 
make such appointment from among all qualified persons filing a Declaration of 
Candidacy.

Subject to the provisions of this Constitution and Bylaws, all elections and other 
(d) 
proceedings to fill a vacancy shall be conducted in accordance with such ordinance and 
resolutions as may be adopted by the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Upon a petition, signed by at least ten (10) percent of the registered voters 
from each district, a referendum may be demanded on any tribal adoption of a person or the 
elimination of a person from the tribal roll, or on any proposed or enacted ordinance or resolution 
of the Tribal Council and the vote of the majority of the qualified voters voting in such 
referendum shall be conclusive and binding upon the Tribal Council, provided at least thirty (30) 
percent of the eligible voters shall vote in such referendum.
 
 

ARTICLE IX- LAND

 
 Section 1. Allotted Lands. Allotted lands, including heirship land, within the 
Northern Cheyenne Indian Reservation shall continue to be held as heretofore by their present 
owners. It is recognized that under existing law such lands may be inherited by the heirs of the 
present owner, whether or not they are members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe. Likewise, it 
is recognized that under existing law the Secretary of the Interior may, in his discretion, remove 
restrictions upon such land, upon application by the Indian owner, whereupon the land will 
become subject to State taxes and may be mortgaged or sold. The right of the individual Indian 
to hold or to part with his land, as under existing law. shall not be abrogated by anything 
contained in this Constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily convey his land to the Northern Cheyenne Tribe either in 
exchange for a money payment or in exchange for an assignment covering the same land or other

land, as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Tribal Lands. The unallotted lands of the Northern Cheyenne Indian 
Reservation and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the Northern Cheyenne Tribe or 
by the United Stares in trust for the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, shall be held as tribal lands and 
no part of such land shall be mortgaged, sold, or ceded. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to 
individual Indians but may be assigned to members of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe, or leased, 
or otherwise used by the Tribe, as hereinafter provided.

Section 3. Leasing of Tribal Land.

Tribal land may be leased by the Tribal Council, with the approval of the 

(a) 
Secretary of the Interior, for such periods as permitted by law.

(b)  Grazing permits covering tribal lands may be issued by the Tribal Council, with 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, for such periods of time as permitted by law.

Section 4. Assignments of Tribal Land.

The Tribal Council may by ordinance approved by the Secretary of the Interior 
(a) 
provide for the granting and tenure of alignments of tribal land to members of the Tribe, 
provided, the rights of all members of the Tribe be not violated.

Any member of the Tribe who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land or 
(b) 
patent-in-fee land may voluntarily transfer his interest in such land to the Tribe in 
exchange for an assignment to the same land or for other land or a proportionate share 
in a larger grazing unit

Section 5. Use of Unassigned Tribal Land. Tribal land which is not leased or 
assigned, including tribal timber reserves, shall be managed by the Tribal Council subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, for the benefit of the members of the entire Tribe, and 
any cash income derived from such land shall accrue to the benefit of the Tribe as a whole.

Section 6. Purchase of Land by Tribe. The Northern Cheyenne Tribal Council is 
hereby authorized and empowered to use tribal funds to purchase lands or interests in lands for 
and on behalf of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe under such terms as may be agreed upon provided 
the purchase is approved by the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE X - AMENDMENTS

 
 This Constitution and Bylaws may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters 
of the Tribe, voting ar an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election, but 
no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the

Interior, It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on any proposed 
amendment at the request of two-thirds (2/3) of the Tribal Council, or upon presentation of a 
petition signed by one-third (1/3) of the qualified voters of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SEPARATION OF POWERS

 
 Section 1, Three Branches of Tribal Government. The power of the government 
of the Tribe shall be divided into three distinct branches — Legislative, Executive and Judicial. 
No person or entity charged with the exercise of power of one branch shall exercise a power 
belonging to another branch unless expressly authorized to do so in this Constitution and Bylaws, 
Tribal law, or applicable federal law.

The Legislative Branch shall consist of the Tribal Council and all committees of 
(a) 
the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall exercise the legislative power of the Tribe, 
subject to the right of referendum reserved to the Tribal membership under Article VIII.

The Executive Branch shall consist of the Tribal President, Vice President, 
(b) 
Secretary and Treasurer, and all administrative agencies, departments and other 
instrumentalities of the Executive Branch.

(c) The Judicial Branch shall consist of all courts established by ordinance under 
Article IV, Section l(i) or any other provision of this Constitution and Bylaws.
 
 

BYLAWS

ARTICLE I - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The President may, if he desires, preside over all meetings of the Tribal 
Council. He shall, with the advice and consent of the Tribal Council, appoint delegates, 
representatives, committees, or other officers as are deemed proper from time to time. He shall 
have power to fill all vacancies, not otherwise provided for in this Constitution and Bylaws, that 
may occur when the Tribal Council is not in session and then he shall submit the names of such 
appointees at the following session. It shall be his duty to convene the Tribal Council for extra 
sessions. It shall be his duty to see that all enactments, orders, and resolutions are properly 
executed. He shall have the further right of conferring with any Federal or State official on any 
matters that affect the welfare of the Tribe. And he shall also have the further right to confer 
with the several district councils.

Section. 2. The Vice President shall act as presiding officer of the Tribal Council 
whenever the President does not so preside. Whenever the President does not preside he may 
delegare any or all of his powers to the Vice President In the event that the office of the 
President becomes vacant, the Vice Prerident shall become temporary President and shall perform 

duties and execute the powers of President until the office of President is filled.

Section 3. The Tribal Council Secretary shall keep a full report of all proceedings of 
each regular and special meeting of the Tribal Council and shall perform such other duties of like 
nature as the Council shall from time to time by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of 
the minutes of each meeting to the President of the Council, to the Superintendent of the 
Reservation, to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and to all recognized District Councils of 
the reservation.

Section 4. The Tribal Council Treasurer shall be the custodian of all moneys which 
come under the jurisdiction or control of the Tribal Council of the Northern Cheyenne. He shall 
pay out money in accordance with the orders and resolutions of the Council. He shall keep 
accounts of all receipts and disbursements and shall make written reports of same to the Tribal 
Council at each regular and special meeting. He shall be bonded in such an amount as the 
Council by resolution shall provide, such bond to be approved by the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs. The books of the Tribal Council Treasurer shall be subject to inspection or audit by the 
direction of the Council or the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Section 5. The Sergeant at Arms shall be present at all regular and extra sessions and 
shall keep order in such meetings and shall perform such other duties as the Tribal Council may 
by resolution provide.
 
 

ARTICLE II - QUALIFICATIONS

 
 Section 1. 

In order for a person to be eligible for rhe office of President of the Tribal

Council he must be at feast thirty (30) years of age and a member, by blood, of the Nonhem 
Cheyenne Tribe.

Section 2. 

Any person elected as a member of the Tribal Council must be at least 

twenty-one (21) years of age and a member of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE III - CERTIFICATION

 
 Section 1. 

The Tribal Council shall appoint an election board which shall certify to 
the election of all members elected and this shall be done within five (5) days after the election.

Section 2. 

(Oath) I, , do solemnly swear that I will support 
and defend the Constitution of the United States against all enemies; carry out faithfully and 
impartially the duties of my office to the best of my ability; promote and protect the best interests 
of my Tribe, the Northern Cheyenne, in accordance with this Constitution and Bylaws.

This oath of office shall be administered by a Notary Public or Judge.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - SALARIES

 
  Section 1. The salaries of the members or other officers of the Tribal Council of the 
Northern Cheyenne Tribe may be paid out of available funds within the exclusive control of the 
Tribal Council or out of any other available tribal funds with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior in accordance with ordinances duly enacted, provided that no Tribal Council shall enact 
any ordinance increasing the salaries of councilmen during the existing term of office.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - MEETINGS AND PROCEDURE

 
 Section 1. 

The Tribal Council shall assemble on the first and third Mondays of each 

month.

Section 2. 

A majority of two-thirds (2/3) of the members of the Tribal Council must 

be present in order to constitute a quorum to do business.

Section 3. 

Extra sessions may be called by the President or by three members of the 
Tribal Council in writing to the President and when so-called two-thirds (2/3) of the members 
of the Tribal Council must be present to constitute a quorum, and the Tribal Council shall have 
power to transact business as in regular meetings.

Section 4. 

The presiding officer in meetings of the Tribal Council shall vote only in 

the case of a tie.

Section 5. 

Every order, resolution, or vote to which the concurrence of the Tribal 
Council may be necessary (except on the question of adjournment) shall be presented to the 
President of the Tribal Council, and before the same shall take effect it shall be approved by him 

or being disapproved by him. may become effective by being repassed by affirmative vote of 
seven members of the Tribal Council.

ARTICLE VI - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTIOiN AND BYLAWS

Section 1. This Constitution and the attached Bylaws when approved by a majority 
of the adult voters of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe voting in a special election called by the 
Secretary of the Interior in which at least 30 percent of the eligible voters vote, shall be submitted 
to rhe Secretary of the Interior for approval and shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - CODE OF ETHICS

 
 Section 1. It is declared that the observance of high ethical standards by the President, 
Vice President, Secretary and Treasurer, and all members of the Tribal Council ("Tribal 
Officials") is essential to the conduct of Tribal government In order to promote such high 
standards of public service and to strengthen the confidence of the Tribal membership in Tribal 
government the principles set forth in Section 2 below are adopted as a Code of Ethics for Tribal 
Officials.

Section 2. Every Tribal Official shall ‘be guided by the following principles in 
discharging the duties and exercising the powers of office. Except as may be otherwise 
specifically required or permitted by Tribal or federal law, while in office every Tribal Official 
shall:

discharge the duties and exercise the powers of office in good faith and in a 

(a) 
manner which the Tribal Official believes will best serve the interests of the Tribe;

not accept any compensation, gratuity, benefit or advantage (other than duly 
(b) 
authorized emoluments of office) from any source other than the Tribe in return for 
exercising or abstaining from exercising any duty or right of office in any particular way;

(c) 

not use Tribal money, property or personnel for personal benefit;

(d) 

not disclose or use for personal gain any confidential information of the Tribe;

not knowingly falsify, alter, conceal or destroy any official book, record, account 

(e) 
or other document of the Tribe;

not present, allow or pay any charge or claim against the Tribe which the Tribal 

(f) 
Official knows to be improper; and

not knowingly make any false statement in any official statement, report, certificate 
(g) 
or other document, presented to or on behalf of Tribal government or the Tribal 
membership, which has an adverse effect on significant interests of the Tribe or its 
membership.
 
 

I

I

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION

 
 The foregoing Amended Constitution and Bylaws have been ratified and approved in rhe 
following manner, pursuant to and in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat 984), as amended:

The Constitution and Bylaws of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe were originally 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior on November 23, 1935, after they were 
ratified by vote of the Tribal membership in which 394 voted in favor and 53 
voted against

On July 8, 1960, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior approved certain 
amendments to the Constitution and Bylaws, after the amendments were ratified 
by vote of the Tribal membership in which 273 voted in favor and 67 voted 
against.

Pursuant to an order dated March 27, 1996, issued under delegated authority by 
the Billings Area Director, Bureau of Indian Affairs, further amendments of the 
Constitution and Bylaws were submitted to the Tribal membership for ratification. 
These further amendments consisted of Amendment A (Governmental Reform), 
Amendment B (Separation of Powers), and Amendment C (Code of Ethics). On 
May 10, 1996, the Tribal membership ratified each of the amendments by the 
following votes: Amendment A, 492 in favor and 74 against: Amendment B, 474 
in favor and 91 against; and Amendment C, 494 in favor and 64 against.

In each of the above-described ratifying votes of the Tribal membership, ballots 
were cast by more than 30% of those Tribal members entitled to vote.

Llevando Fisher, President
Northern Cheyenne Tribe

Debra Bearquiver. Secretary 
Northern Cheyenne Tribe

John White, Acting Superintendent
Northern Cheyenne Agency
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Keith Bearrusk, Area Director. Billings Area Office. Bureau of Indian Affairs, by virtue 
of authority delegated to me under the Act of June IS, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do 
hereby approve the foregoing Amended Constitution and Bylaws of the Northern Cheyenne Tribe 
of the Northern Cheyenne Indian. Reservation, as amended by ratifying vote of the Tribal 
membership on May 10, 1996.

Keith Bearrusk, Area Director 
Billings Area Office

Billings, Montana, May 31, 1996
 
 

I

 
 