 
  
  
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

 
 ♦ 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE 
ONEIDA TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF WISCONSIN


 
  
  
 APPROVED DECEMBER 21, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1937 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE ONEIDA TRIBE 
OF INDIANS OF WISCONSIN


We, the people of the Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin, grate
ful to Almighty God for his fostering care, in order to reestablish our 
tribal organization, to conserve and develop our common resources 
and to promote the welfare of ourselves and our descendants, do here
by ordain and establish this Constitution.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin shall extend to 
the territory within the present confines of the Oneida Reservation 
and to such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto within or 
without said boundary lines under any law of the United States, 
except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin shall 

consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

annuity roll of the Tribe as of October 7, 1935.

(b)  Any descendant of a member of the Tribe who is of at least 
one-quarter Indian blood, provided such member is a resident of the 
Reservation at the time of the birth of the said descendant.

Sec. 2. The General Tribal Council shall have the power to pro
mulgate ordinances subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior 
covering future membership and the adoption of new members.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin 
shall be the General Tribal Council which shall be composed of all 
the qualified voters of the Oneida Reservation.

Sec. 2. All enrolled members of the Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin 
who are twenty-one years of age or over, and who have maintained 
continuous residence on the Oneida Reservation of not less than 
thirty (30) days, immediately preceding an election, shall be qualified 
voters, provided they shall present themselves in person at the polls 
on the day of election.

Sec. 3. The General Tribal Council shall elect from its own mem
bers by secret ballet (a) a chairman; (b) a vice-chairman; (c) a 
secretary; (d) a treasurer; (e) and such other officers and committees 
as may be deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. The General Tribal Council shall meet on the first Monday 
of January and July. Within thirty days after the ratification and 
approval of this Constitution and By-laws, a General Tribal Council

shall be called by the present Tribal Council for the purpose of 
electing the officers named herein, and it shall transact such other 
business as may be necessary. The officers elected at this meeting 
shall serve until the July meeting at which time their successors 
shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be chosen at the July 
meeting. The chairman, or twenty-five (25) per cent of the qualified 
voters, may by written notice, call special meetings of the General 
Tribal Council.

One-third (1/3) of the qualified voters of the Tribe shall constitute 

a quorum at any special or regular meeting.

Sec. 5. There shall be an executive committee, consisting of the 
chairman, vice-chairman, secretary, and treasurer of the General 
Tribal Council, which shall perform such duties as may be authorized 
by that Council.

Article IV—Powers of the General Tribal Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The General Tribal Council of 
the Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin shall exercise the following powers, 
subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution 
of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments.
(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets of the tribe.

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin prior to the submission of such estimates 
to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Oneida 
Tribe of Wisconsin in accordance with the terms of a Charter that 
may be issued to the tribe by the Secretary of the Interior.

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct of 
members of the Oneida Tribe of Wisconsin, providing for the manner 
of making, holding, and revoking assignments of tribal land or 
interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes and the appro
priation of available tribal funds for public purposes, providing for 
the licensing of non-members coming upon the reservation for pur
poses of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, and for the ex
clusion from the territory of the tribe of persons not so licensed and 
establishing proper agencies for law enforcement upon the Oneida 
Reservation.

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the 
right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.
(h) To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and the attached By-laws, regulating the procedure of the Coun
cil itself and of other tribal agencies, tribal officials, or tribal 
organizations of the Oneida Reservation.

Sec. 2. Future Powers.—The General Tribal Council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Council 
by the Secretary of the Interior or any other duly authorized official 
or agency of the State or Federal Government.

Sec. 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin but not expressly 
referred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this Article, 
but may be exercised by the people of the Oneida Tribe of Wiscon
sin through the adoption of appropriate By-laws and constitutional 
amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance which 
by the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secre
tary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the 
Reservation, who shall, within ten days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Sec
retary of the interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of 
enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, 
by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him, within ten days after its enactment, 
he shall advise the Council of his reasons therefor. If these reasons 
appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by a majority vote, refer 
the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, who 
may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, approve the 
same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall 
become effective.

Article V—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the Tribe voting at an election called 
for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at 
least thirty (30) per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 
election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall have 
been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment upon receipt of a petition 
signed by one-third (1/3) of the qualified voters of the Tribe.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE ONEIDA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF WISCONSIN

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman of Council.—The Chairman of the Council 
shall preside over all meetings of the Council, shall perform the usual 
duties of a Chairman, and exercise any authority delegated to him 
by the Council. He shall vote only in the case of a tie.

Sec. 2. Vice-Chairman of the Council.—The Vice-Chairman shall 
assist the Chairman when called upon to do so and in the absence of 
the Chairman he shall preside. When so presiding, he shall have all 

the rights, privileges and duties as well as the responsibilities of the 
Chairman.

Sec. 3. Secretary of the Council.—The Secretary of the Tribal 
Council shall conduct all tribal correspondence and shall keep an 
accurate record of all matters transacted at Council meetings. It 
shall be his duty to submit promptly to the Superintendent of the 
jurisdiction, and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, copies of all 
minutes of regular and special meetings of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 4. Treasurer of Council.—The Treasurer of the Tribal Coun
cil shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all funds 
in the custody of the Council, whether they be tribal funds or special 
funds for which the Council is acting as trustee or custodian. He 
shall deposit all funds in such depository as the Council shall direct 
and shall make and preserve a faithful record of such funds and 
shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount and 
nature of all funds in his possession and custody, at each regular 
meeting of the General Tribal Council, and at such other times as 
requested by the Council or the executive committee.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his posses
sion or custody, except in accordance with a resolution duly passed 
by the Council.

The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the 

Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 5. Appointive Officers.—The duties of all appointive boards 
or officers of the Community shall be clearly defined by resolutions 
of the Council at the time of their creation or appointment. Such 
boards and officers shall report, from time to time as required, to 
the Council, and their activities and decisions shall be subject to 
review by the Council upon the petition of any person aggrieved.

Article II—Ratification of Constitution and By-laws

This Constitution and these By-laws, when adopted by a majority 
vote of the voters of the Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin voting 
at a special election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which 
at least 30 per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be sub
mitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be 
effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 14, 1936, by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws were submitted 
for ratification to the members of the Oneida Indian Tribe of the 
Oneida Reservation and were on November 14, 1936, duly adopted 
by a vote of 790 for and 16 against, in an election in which over 30 
per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance 
with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378). 

Frank Christy, Superintendent.

Morris Wheelock,

Chairman of Election Board.
Katie Cornelius,
Secretary of Election Board.
 
 

 
 
 I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Oneida Tribe of Indians 
of Wisconsin.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and 
By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Oneida Tribe of 
Indians of Wisconsin.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended December 16, 1936.

William Zimmerman, Jr., 

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., December 21, 1936.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.

[seal]

AMENDMENTS—CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS FOR THE 
 
 
ONEIDA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF WISCONSIN

 
 Amendment 1.

That section 3 of Article III, of the Constitution be changed by 
substituting the words, "The qualified voters of the Oneida Tribe of 
Indians of Wisconsin shall elect from among the qualified voters of 
the tribe” for the present words, “The General Tribal Council shall 
elect from its own members”.
Amendment 2.

That an additional paragraph be added to section 3 of Article III, 

as follows:

"The General Tribal Council shall enact necessary rules and regu

lations governing the election of tribal officials.”
Amendment 3.

That the sentence in the first paragraph of section 4, Article III, 
reading, “Thereafter, officials shall be chosen at the July meeting” be 
changed to read, “Thereafter, officials shall be elected annually in July 
on a date to be set by the General Tribal Council." 
Amendment 4.

That the second paragraph of section 4, Article III, reading, “One- 
third (1/3) of the qualified voters of the Tribe shall constitute a 
quorum at any special or regular meeting,” lie changed to read as 
follows:

“Fifty qualified voters of the Tribe shall constitute a quorum at any 

regular or special meeting of the General Tribal Council.”
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved January 13, 1939, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendments to the Constitu
tion and By-laws of the Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin were 
submitted for ratification to the qualified voters of the Tribe, and were 
on June 3, 1939, duly adopted by a vote as follows: Amendment 1, 246 
for, and 10 against; Amendment 2, 241 for, and 11 against; Amend
ment 3, 246 for, and 8 against; Amendment 4, 218 for, and 36 against, 
in an election in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast 
their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganiza
tion Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984). as amended by the Act of 
June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

David O. Skenandore 
Chairman of Election Board 
Lydia Powless
Secretary of Election Board

Peru Farver,

Superintendent, Tomah School.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by

the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Amendments to the Constitution and By-laws of the 
Oneida Tribe of Indians of Wisconsin.

Approval recommended: June 10, 1939.

Fred H. Daiker, 

Assistant Commissioner of Indian A ffairs.

[seal] 

Oscar L. Chapman

Assistant Secretary of the Interior

Washington, D. C., June 15, 1939.

