 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF  
 
THE ONEIDA NATION

 
 We, the people of the Oneida Nation, grateful to Almighty God for his fostering care, in 
order to reestablish our tribal organization, to conserve and develop our common resources 
and to promote the welfare of ourselves and our descendants, do hereby ordain and establish 
this Constitution.

This constitution serves as an affirmation of the Oneida Nation’s sovereign status as an 
independent Indian nation and the solemn trust relationship between this Nation and the 
United States of America.

Article I-Territory

The jurisdiction of the Oneida Nation shall extend to the territory within the present confines 
of the Oneida Reservation and to such other lands as may be hereafter added thereto within 
or without said boundary lines under any law of the United States, except as otherwise 
provided by law.

Section 1.  The membership of the Oneida Nation shall consist of:

Article II-Membership

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the membership roll of the 

Oneida Nation in accordance with the Act of September 27, 1967 (81 Stat. 229), Public Law 
90-93.

(b)  Any child of a member of the Nation born between September 28, 1967, and the 

effective date of this amendment, who is of at least one-fourth degree Indian blood, provided, 
that, such member is a resident of the Reservation at the time of the birth of said child.

(c)  All children who possess at least one-fourth degree Oneida blood are born after 

the effective date of this amendment to members of the Nation who are residents of the 
reservation at the time of said children's birth.

Section 2.  The General Tribal Council shall have the power to promulgate ordinances 
covering future membership and the adoption of new members.

Article III-Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Oneida Nation shall be the General Tribal Council 
composed of all the qualified voters of the Oneida Nation.

Section 2. All enrolled members of the Oneida Nation who are eighteen (18) years of age or 
over shall be qualified voters provided they present themselves in person at the polls on the 
day of election.

Section 3. The qualified voters of the Oneida Nation shall elect from among the enrolled 
Oneida Nation members age twenty-one (21) and over who physically reside in either Brown 

or Outagamie Counties of Wisconsin by secret ballot (a) a chairman; (b) a vice-chairman; (c) 
a secretary; (d) a treasurer; (e) and five councilmen. These shall constitute the Business 
Committee and shall perform such duties as may be authorized by the General Tribal Council

A majority of the Business Committee including the chairman or vice-chairman shall 

constitute a quorum of this body. Regular meetings of the Business Committee may be 
established by resolution of the Business Committee. Special meetings of the Business 
Committee shall be held upon a three-day advance notice by the chairman to all members 
thereof or upon written request of a majority of the Business Committee stating the time, 
place, and purpose of the meeting.

The General Tribal Council may at any regular special meeting fill any vacancies that 

occur on the Business Committee for the unexpired term.

The General Tribal Council may at its discretion remove any official on the Business 

Committee by a two-thirds majority vote at any regular or special meeting of the Tribal 
Council, pursuant to a duly adopted ordinance. Such ordinance shall fix the specific causes 
for removal and ensure that the rights of the accused are protected, including his receiving in 
writing a statement of the charges against him and assurance on sufficient notice thereof 
where he shall be afforded every opportunity to speak in his own defense.

Section 4. The General Tribal Council shall meet in January and July.

Section 5. The officials provided for in Section 3 of this Article shall be elected every three 
years in the month of July on a date set by the General Tribal Council. The General Tribal 
Council shall enact necessary rules and regulations governing the elections of tribal officials.

Section 6. The chairman or fifty (50) qualified voters may, by written notice, call special 
meetings of the General Tribal Council. Seventy-five (75) qualified voters shall constitute a 
quorum at any regular or special meeting of the General Tribal Council.

Article IV-Powers of the General Tribal Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers. - The General Tribal Council of the Oneida Nation shall 
exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the statutes or the 
Constitution of the United States:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments.

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees.

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, interests in 

lands, or other tribal assets of the Nation.

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appropriation 
estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Oneida Nation prior to the submission of 
such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Oneida Nation.

(f)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, governing the conduct of members of the

Oneida Nation, providing for the manner of making, holding, and revoking assignments of 
tribal land or interests therein, providing for the levying of taxes and the appropriation of 
available tribal funds for public purposes, providing for the licensing of non-members coming 
upon the reservation for purposes of hunting, fishing, trading, or other business, and for the 
exclusion from the territory of the Nation of persons not so licensed and establishing proper 
agencies for law enforcement upon the Oneida Reservation.

(g)  To appoint committees, delegates, and officials deemed necessary for the proper 

conduct of tribal business or relations.

(h)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes and to delegate to such 

organizations, or to any subordinate boards or officials of the Nation, any of the foregoing 
powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.

(i)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution and the attached 

Bylaws, regulating the procedure of the Council itself and of other tribal agencies, tribal 
officials, or tribal organizations of the Oneida Reservation.

Section 2. Future Powers. - The General Tribal Council may exercise such further powers as 
may in the future be delegated to the Council by the Secretary of the Interior or any other
duly authorized official or agency of the State or Federal Government.

Section 3. Reserved Powers. - Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Oneida Nation
but not expressly referred to in this Constitution shall not be abridged by this Article, but
may be exercised by the people of the Oneida Nation through the adoption of appropriate 
By-laws and constitutional amendments.

Section 1. The General Tribal Council shall, by law, establish a judiciary to exercise the 
judicial authority of the Oneida Nation.

Article V-Judiciary

Section 2. Any judiciary in operation prior to the effective date of this amendment to the 
Constitution may be designated as the judiciary authorized under this article upon passage of 
a resolution by the General Tribal Council. Such designation shall remain in full force and 
effect until amended by General Tribal Council.

Article VI - Amendment

Section 1. Amendment by the Oneida Business Committee. Amendments to this Constitution 
and By-Laws may be proposed by the Oneida Business Committee. Proposed amendments 
agreed to by eight members of the Oneida Business Committee, excluding the Chair, shall be 
put before a meeting of the General Tribal Council. If a majority of the voting General 
Tribal Council members vote in favor of the proposed amendment, the proposed amendment 
shall be placed upon the ballot of the next General election or special election called for the 
purpose to consider an amendment.

Section 2. Amendment by Petition. Amendment to this Constitution and By-Laws may be 
proposed by petition of the members eligible to vote. Every petition shall include the full text 
of the proposed amendment, and be signed by members eligible to vote, equal in number to 

at least ten percent (10%) of the members eligible to vote. Petition with the requisite number 
of signatures may be put before the Oneida people for their approval or rejection at the next 
general election, except when the Oneida Business Committee or General Tribal Council 
orders a special election for the purpose. Such petitions shall be filed with the person 
authorized by law to receive the same at least ninety (90) days before the election at which 
the proposed amendment is to be voted upon. Any such petition shall be in the form, and 
shall be signed and circulated in such manner, as prescribed by Oneida law. The person 
authorized by law to receive such petition shall upon its receipt determine, as provide by law, 
the validity and sufficiency of the signatures on the petition, and make an official 
announcement thereof at least sixty (60) days prior to the election at which the proposed 
amendment is to be voted upon. Any amendment proposed by such petition shall be 
submitted, not less than ninety (90) days after it was filed, to the next general or special 
election called for the purpose to consider an amendment.

Section 3. Any proposed amendment, existing provision of the Constitution and By-Laws 
which would be altered or abrogated thereby, and the question as it shall appear on the ballot 
shall be published in full as provided by Oneida Law. Copies of such publications shall be 
prominently posted in each polling place, at Tribal administration offices, and furnished to 
news media as provided Oneida law.

The ballot to be used in such election shall contain a statement of the purpose of the 
proposed amendment, expressed in not more than one hundred (100) words, exclusive of 
caption. Such statement of purpose and caption shall be prepared by the person who is so 
authorized by Oneida law, and shall consist of a true and impartial statement of the purpose 
of the amendment in such language as to create no prejudice for or against the proposed 
amendment.

If the proposed amendment is approved by sixty-five percent (65%) of the members eligible 
to vote who presented themselves at the polls and voted on the question, it shall become part 
of the Oneida Constitution and By-Laws, and shall abrogate or amend existing provisions of 
the Constitution and By-Laws at the end of thirty (30) days after submission of the final 
election report as directed law. If two or more amendments approved by the voters at the 
same election conflict, the amendment receiving the highest affirmation vote shall prevail.

Article VII-Bill of Rights

All members of the Nation shall be accorded equal opportunities to participate in the 
economic resources and activities of the Nation. All members of the tribe may enjoy, without 
hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, association and due 
process of law, as guaranteed by the Constitution of the United States.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE ONEIDA NATION

 
 Article I-Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman of Council. - The Chairman of the Council shall preside over all 
meetings of the Council, shall perform the usual duties of a Chairman, and exercise any 
authority delegated to him by the Council. He shall vote only in the case of a tie.

Section 2. Vice-Chairman of Council. - The Vice-Chairman shall assist the Chairman when 
called upon to do so and in the absence of the Chairman, he shall preside. When so 
presiding, he shall have all the rights, privileges and duties as well as the responsibilities of 
the Chairman.

Section 3. Secretary of the Council. - The Secretary of the Tribal Council shall conduct all 
tribal correspondence and shall keep an accurate record of all matters transacted at Council 
meetings. It shall be his duty to submit promptly to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction, 
and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, copies of all minutes of regular and special meetings 
of the Tribal Council.

Section 4. Treasurer of Council. - The Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall accept, receive, 
receipt for, preserve and safeguard all funds in the custody of the Council, whether they be 
tribal funds or special funds for which the Council is acting as trustee or custodian. He shall 
deposit all funds in such depository as the Council shall direct and shall make and preserve a 
faithful record of such funds and shall report on all receipts and expenditures and the amount 
and nature of all funds in his possession and custody, at each regular meeting of the General 
Tribal Council, and at such other times as requested by the Council or the business 
committee.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his possession or custody, 

except in accordance with a resolution duly passed by the Council.

The Treasurer shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the Council and to the 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Section 5. Appointive Officers. - The duties of all appointive boards or officers of the 
Community shall be clearly defined by resolutions of the Council at the time of their creation 
or appointment. Such boards and officers shall report, from time to time as required, to the 
Council, and their activities and decisions shall be subject to review by the Council upon the 
petition of any person aggrieved.

Article II-Ratification of Constitution and By-laws

This Constitution and these By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote of the voters of the 
Oneida Nation voting at a special election called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at 
least 30 per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of 
the Interior for his approval, and shall be effective from the date of such approval.

Adoption Dates
-Original Constitution adopted November 14, 1936 by Oneida Tribe. Approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior December 21, 1936.
-Amended June 3, 1939, approved June 15, 1939.
-Amended October 18, 1969, approved November 28, 1969.
-Amended June 14, 1969, approved August 25, 1969.
-Amended June 14, 1969, approved August 25, 1969.
-Amended June 14, 1969, approved, August 25, 1969.
-Amendment X approved June 16, 2015, notice received June 24, 2015
-Amendment XI approved June 16, 2015, notice received June 24, 2015
-Amendment XII approved June 16, 2015, notice received June 24, 2015
-Amendment XIII approved June 16, 2015, notice received June 24, 2015
-Amendment XIV approved June 16, 2015, notice received June 24, 2015

