 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

OF THE

OTOE-MISSOURIA TRIBE OF INDIANS

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians in recognition of God 
Almighty, in order to promote our common welfare, conserve and develop our lands and 
resources, and secure for ourselves and our descendants the rights, powers and 
privileges of self government do establish and ratify this Constitution for the Otoe- 
Missouria Tribe of Indians pursuant to our inherent powers of self-government and the 
Act of Congress approved June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), known as the Thomas-Rogers 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act.

The name of this organization shall be the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

ARTICLE II - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians shall extend to all Indian 
country, as defined by 18 U.S.C. 1151, within the original boundaries of the Otoe- 
Missouria reservation established in 1883, and to such other land as may hereafter be 
acquired by the Tribe or added thereto under any law of the United States.
 
 

ARTICLE III - PURPOSE

 
 The objectives of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians in organizing under this 
Constitution shall be:

Section 1. To promote the general welfare of the Tribe and its members.

Sec. 2. To secure for the Tribe and its members the benefits, rights, privileges and 
powers provided for in the Act of Congress approved June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), 
known as the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act.

Sec. 3. To secure for the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians a charter of incorporation 
from the Secretary of the Interior that allows the Tribe to enjoy, in addition to those 
powers specifically mentioned in the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act, any other rights or 
privileges secured to an organized Indian tribe under the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 
984), as incorporated by reference through Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare 
Act, 25 U.S.C. 503.

Sec. 4. To secure the benefits, rights, privileges and powers as provided by any laws of 
the United States now existing or that may hereafter be enacted for the benefit of 
Indians or other citizens of the United States.

Sec. 5. The protections guaranteed to persons by Title II of the Civil Rights Act of 
1968 (82 Stat. 77), against actions of a Tribe in exercising its powers of self-government 
shall apply to the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians, its officers and all persons within its 
jurisdiction.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians shall consist of the 
following persons who have not received land or money by virtue of being enrolled as 
members of another Indian Tribe:

(a)  All persons whose names appear on the official membership roll of the Tribe 

as of October 14, 1966.

(b)  All persons who met the requirements for enrollment in effect as of 
October 14, 1966, but whose names do not appear on the roll of that date.

(c)  All persons born to a tribal member after October 14, 1966, who are of at 

least one-fourth (1/4) degree Otoe-Missouria Tribal blood.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall implement the provisions of the Membership Resolution 
adopted February 24, 1949, for determining membership eligibility under Section 1(b) 
above and shall have the power to enact an enrollment ordinance consistent with the 
above provisions, subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior, which shall 
include provisions for adoption and loss of membership and all other enrollment rules 
and procedures, including the establishment of an enrollment committee,
 
 

ARTICLE V - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Composition. The General Council shall consist of all members of the Tribe 
eighteen (18) years of age or older, who are duly registered to vote.

Sec. 2. Powers. The specific powers reserved to the General Council are set forth in 
Section 2(a) of Article VIII.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Composition. The representative governing body of the Tribe shall be the 
Tribal Council composed of seven (7) members elected by secret ballot by the qualified 
voters of the Tribe. Such governing body shall be known as "The Otoe-Missouria Tribal 
Council."

Sec. 2. Powers. The Tribal Council's powers are set forth in Section 1 of Article VIII.

Sec. 3. Officers. A Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Secretary, Treasurer, and three (3) 
Councilmen shall be elected at large by plurality vote; provided, that a person shall be a 
candidate for only one (1) of the seven (7) positions.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election. Within ninety (90) days after the date this Constitution is 
ratified, the Election Board, which conducted the ratification election, shall conduct 
the first election to fill the seven (7) Tribal Council positions and the four (4) positions 
on the tribal Election Board pursuant to regulations prescribed by that interim Election 
Board which shall be consistent with this Constitution. The Chairman, Secretary, and 
two (2) Councilmen shall be elected to serve until their successors are installed 
following the November 1986 regular election. The Vice-Chairman, the Treasurer, and 
the remaining councilman shall be elected to serve until their successors are installed 
following the first regular election to be held in November 1985. Thereafter, all terms 
of office shall be for three (3) years or until successors are duly elected and installed.

Regarding establishment of the Election Board, one (1) position shall initially be filled 
for a one (1) year term, one (1) shall be for a term of two (2) years, another shall be 
filled for a three (3) year period, and the remaining position shall be filled for a four (4) 
year term of office. Thereafter, elections for filling the vacancy that occurs each year 
on the Election Board shall be by secret balloting during the annual General Council 
meeting and those elected shall serve for four (4) year terms or until their successors 
are duly elected and installed.

The Business Committee in existence at the time this Constitution is ratified shall 
continue to serve until those initially elected to the Tribal Council are installed in 
office.

Sec. 2. Regular Elections.

(a)  Tribal Council. Regular elections for the Tribal Council shall be conducted 
on the first Saturday of November during those years in which terms expire, 
beginning in 1985.

(b)  Election Board. Regular elections for the Election Board shall be by secret 

ballot during annual meetings of the General Council.

Sec. 3. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, including initiative, recall and 
referendum, shall be conducted by an impartial election board pursuant to an election 
ordinance which shall be enacted by the Tribal Council within six (6) months following 
the effective date of this Constitution. Such ordinance shall be consistent with this 
Constitution and shall include provisions for advance nomination of candidates, voter 
registration, absentee voting, secret ballots, and a procedure for resolving election 
disputes. Further, the ordinance shall set forth procedures for submitting petitions and 
determining their validity.

Sec. 4. Election Board. A four (4) member Election Board shall be created by electing 
persons to that body on an at-large basis at the first election following ratification of 
this Constitution as provided in Section 1 of this Article. Candidates for election to the

Election Board must meet those qualifications set forth in Section 5 of Article VII. The 
Election Board shall carry out provisions of the Election Ordinance objectively and 
fairly. No person who is a member of the Election Board shall, at the same time, be a 
candidate for, or serve on, the Tribal Council. An Election Board member who is a 
candidate for reelection to that body, shall not serve during such election in order to 
avoid a conflict of interest.

Sec. 5. Qualifications of Candidates. Any person who desires to become a candidate 
for election or appointment to elective tribal office, and prospective candidates for 
appointment to the Tribal Court, must meet the qualifications set forth below; 
provided, that any elected person removed or recalled from office after ratification of 
this Constitution for any reason shall not be eligible to become a candidate for a period 
of four (4) years from the date of such removal or recall.

(a)  must be an enrolled member of the Tribe,
(b)  must be at least twenty-five (25) years of age,
(c)  must be duly registered to vote in the tribe's voter registration system,
(d)  must be eligible to be bonded in order to satisfy the requirement of Section 

4 of Article XIII, and

(e)  must not have been convicted of a felony by a court of competent 

jurisdiction.

Sec. 6. Filing to be a Candidate. It shall be the responsibility of prospective candidates 
to file declaration of candidacy with the Election Board and certify (or furnish 
documentary evidence) their qualifications.

Sec. 7. Lack of Candidates. If there are positions on either the Tribal Council or the 
Election Board which are vacant due to a lack of candidates, those positions shall be 
considered vacant and filled according to Article IX, Section 1.

Sec. 8. Voter Qualifications. In order to be a qualified voter, the following 
requirements must be met:

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

an enrolled member of the Tribe,
at least eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the election, and
be duly registered to vote in the tribe's voter registration system.

Sec. 9. Installation of Elected Officials. The duly elected Tribal Council members and 
members of the Election Board shall be installed in office at a meeting to be held as 
soon as possible following the election. The oath of office shall be administered by an 
appropriate tribal member chosen by the Election Board.

Sec. 10. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least three-hundred (300) 
adult members, it shall be the duty of the Election Board to call and conduct, within 
thirty (30) days, a special meeting of the General Council to vote by secret ballot on 
the recall of any elected official. Before voting on that issue, such official shall be 
given a written statement of the charges against him/her at least ten (10) days before 
the recall meeting. 5uch meeting shall be subject to the quorum provisions set forth in 
Article XI, Section 1(a). An elected official shall be subjected to recall proceedings 
only once during any term of office. Only one (1) official shall be considered for recall 
at any given recall meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS

 
 Section 1. Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall have final authority to transact 
business and otherwise speak or act on behalf of the Tribe in all matters on which the 
Tribe is empowered to act now or in the future, except as otherwise provided in this 
Constitution. The Tribal Council shall have authority to appoint subordinate commit
tees and representatives and delegate to them any of the Tribal Council's powers. 
Further, the Tribal Council's authority shall include the power to enact ordinances and 
adopt regulations to administer governmental functions of the Tribe. The exercise of 
tribal powers shall be consistent with this Constitution and Federal Law.

Sec. 2. Qualified Voters. The powers set forth in this Section are reserved for exercise 
by the qualified voters in the manner described below:

(a)  General Council. The following powers are to be exercised in meetings of 

the General Council:

1. 

enact an ordinance dealing with land acquisition and management for 
implementation by the Tribal Council.

2.  make decisions regarding changes in the tribal burial program.

3. 

4. 

adopt or reject initiative proposals in accordance with Section 1 of 
Article X.

adopt or reject referendum proposals in accordance with Section 2 of 
Article X.

(b)  Elections. The powers set forth below are to be exercised at elections 
which require absentee voting and secret balloting. While such elections 
may be held in conjunction with General Council sessions, they are separate 
from requirements for meetings of the qualified voters:

1. 

election and recall of tribal officials in accordance with Article VII

2. 

3. 

filling of vacancies in accordance with Article IX, Section I

ratification of this Constitution in accordance with Article XVI

(c)  Petition. The following powers are to be exercised by petition:

1. 

2. 

3. 

propose amendments to this Constitution in accordance with Article 
 
 
XV

 
 initiate recall proceedings in accordance with Section 10 of Article VII

request the calling of special General Council meetings in accordance 
with Section 1(c) of Article XI

Sec. 3. Inherent Powers. No provisions of this Constitution shall be construed as a 
limitation on the inherent sovereign powers of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - VACANCIES, REMOVAL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. Vacancies. Vacancies in the membership of the Tribal Council which occur 
in the first two (2) years of the elected term shall be filled at a special election as 
provided for in the election ordinance. Vacancies occurring in the last year of the 
elected term shall be filled by the Tribal Council appointing a person who meets the 
qualifications for election to that position.

Vacancies on the Election Board shall be filled by the Tribal Council appointing a person 
who qualifies for election to such position. The appointee shall serve until the next 
annual meeting of the General Council at which time a qualified successor shall be 
elected to fill that position for any time remaining in such term of office. Voluntary 
resignation by any Tribal Council member or member of the Election Board shall be in 
writing and shall be effective when accepted by a resolution of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. Removal. Any elected or appointed official found guilty in a court of competent 
jurisdiction, or by the Tribal Council, of behavior involving misconduct reflecting on the 
dignity and integrity of the tribal government, malfeasance in office, or gross neglect 
of duty, may be removed from office if at least four (4) members of the Tribal Council 
vote in favor of such removal. Voting must be by secret ballot and the Chairman is 
entitled to vote. If the accused is a Tribal Council member, he/she shall have the right 
to vote by secret ballot. Before, the vote for removal is taken, the accused tribal 
official shall be given a written statement of the charges at least ten (10) days before 
the Tribal Council meeting at which he or she is to appear, and shall be given an 
opportunity to answer any and all charges at such meeting. Any removed member of 
the Tribal Council or Election Board shall not be returned to office unless subsequently 
elected by the Tribe's qualified voters. No member of the Tribal Council shall call or 
preside over the meeting at which his or her removal is being considered. The decision 
of the Tribal Council shall be final.

(a) Absences. Tribal Council members who are absent from two (2) successive 
regular meetings of that body, or a total of three (3) regular meetings in one 
(1) year, may be removed from office by a majority vote of the Tribal 
Council members present at a meeting called for that purpose, unless such 
absences are excused by a majority vote of the Tribal Council. The due 
process provisions set forth above shall also be required in pursuing removal 
for unexcused absences.

Sec. 3. Forfeiture. Any member of the Tribal Council, the Election Board, or the 
Tribal Court, who, during the term for which he or she is elected or appointed, is 
convicted of a felony by a court of competent jurisdiction, shall automatically forfeit 
his or her position effective on the date of the initial conviction.
 
 

ARTICLE X - POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. Initiative. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least one hundred 
fifty (150) adult enrolled tribal members, it shall be the duty of the Election Board to 
call and conduct within sixty (60) days, an initiative election to be conducted at a 
special meeting of the General Council. Such meeting shall be for the purpose of 

presenting to the qualified voters for their determination any issue or question, except 
recall, and as otherwise provided by this Constitution.

A decision by the majority of those voting shall be binding on the Tribal Council until 
its expires by its own terms or is otherwise changed by action of the voters. A quorum 
must be present to validate such action. Once an initiative issue has been submitted to 
the voters and rejected, that same issue shall not again be considered for such action 
for at least six (6) months.

Sec. 2. Referendum. Upon receipt of a valid resolution supported by an affirmative 
vote of at least four (4) members of the Tribal Council, the Election Board shall refer 
to the voters for their determination, such issue requested by the Tribal Council. The 
referendum may be conducted at an annual or special meeting of the General Council. 
Except for special meetings called for referendum purposes, it shall not be necessary to 
give prior notice of the matter being referred to the voters. A majority of those who 
vote shall decide the issue and such decision shall be binding on the Tribal Council until 
otherwise changed by the voters; provided, a quorum is present. The Tribal Council's 
request for a referendum election may include decisions related to those powers 
reserved to the General Council set forth in Section 2(a) 1 and 2 of Article VIII.

Section 1. General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - MEETINGS

 
 (a)  Quorum. One-hundred (100) qualified voters shall constitute a quorum in 
order to conduct business at any annual or special meeting of the General 
Council. No enactment of the General Council shall have any validity in the 
absence of a quorum at the time it is voted upon.

(b)  Annual Meeting. The Otoe-Missouria General Council shall meet annually 
on the first Saturday in November. The Tribal Council shall properly notice 
the hour and place of the meeting. Upon determination by the Tribal 
Council that, due to an extreme emergency, the annual meeting cannot be 
held on the First Saturday in November, the Tribal Council shall designate 
another meeting date; provided, the meeting is held within thirty (30) days 
of the regular date upon proper notice.

(c) 

Special Meeting. Special meetings of the Otoe-Missouria General Council 
may be called at the discretion of the Chairman of the Tribal Council; 
provided, that in each instance, a notice, including the purpose of the 
meeting, shall be posted and published at least ten (10) days in advance. 
Special meetings of the General Council shall be called by the Chairman 
upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least one hundred fifty (150) 
adult members of Tribe, or by resolution of the Tribal Council, for the 
purpose of bringing special business or issues to the Tribal Council for 
discussion and/or enactment. The petition or resolution must state the 
purpose of the meeting. If, upon validation of the petition by the Election 
Board, the Chairman does not call and notice the meeting within fifteen (15) 
days after validation, the next highest ranking officer shall exercise such 

authority, and upon the failure of any of the Tribal Council members to call 
and notice the special meeting, the petitioner spokesman shall proceed to 
call, notice and conduct the special meeting; provided, the quorum of one 
hundred (100) General Council members shall be required to validate actions 
taken at such meeting. Special meetings of the General Council shall not be 
cancelled after the ten (10) day notice is posted and published.

Sec. 2. Tribal Council Meetings.

(a)  Quorum. Five (5) members of the Tribal Council shall constitute a quorum 
of the Tribal Council membership thereof. No enactment of the Tribal 
Council will have any validity in the absence of a quorum.

(b)  Regular Meetings. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held 
monthly at a place and date established by ordinance of the Tribal Council. 
The Tribal Secretary shall be responsible for telephoning or sending written 
notices to each member in advance of the meeting if the regular date and 
place should have to be changed. The Tribal Council shall have the 
authority to call an Executive Session of any Tribal Council meeting.

(c) 

Special Meetings. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by 
the Chairman at his discretion, and shall be called by the Chairman upon the 
written request of at least four (4) members of the Tribal Council; provided, 
that the reason for the meeting is stated in the request and that each 
member of the Tribal Council is given at least seventy-two (72) hours 
advance notice of any special meeting. Upon refusal by the Chairman to 
call a special meeting within seventy-two (72) hours upon the written 
request of four (4) members of the Tribal Council, the four (4) members who 
requested the special meeting may proceed to call and conduct the special 
meeting; provided, a quorum of five (5) members of the Tribal Council is 
present.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - TRIBAL COURT

 
 Section 1. Until such time as the Tribal Council determines that the Tribe is financially 
and otherwise prepared to maintain a separate Tribal Court, the judicial authority of 
the Tribe shall be exercised by the Court of Indian Offenses. The jurisdiction of the 
Court of Indian Offenses shall include, but not be limited to, criminal and civil 
jurisdiction, including settlement of tribal disputes and interpretation of this Constitu
tion and tribal enactments.

Sec. 2. When the Tribal Council determines that the Tribe is prepared to begin 
exercising its judicial authority, it shall notify the Court of Indian Offenses by 
resolution, transmitting the following:

(a) 
(b) 
(c) 

a copy of the judicial ordinance,
a plan for establishing the Tribal Court, and
a time table and procedures for orderly transition of pending cases.

In line with the above provisions, the judicial authority of the Tribe will, thereafter, be 
exercised by the Tribal Court. If, because of financial or other reasons, it is not 
appropriate for the Tribe to continue to maintain a separate Tribal Court, the Tribal 
Council may restore jurisdiction to the Court of Indian Offenses.

Sec. 3. If the Tribal Council determines that the Tribe shall maintain a separate Tribal 
Court, or courts, that court shall possess all of the judicial powers of the Tribe, 
including such powers that may, in the future, be granted to the Tribe by Federal Law. 
The Tribal Council shall enact a judicial ordinance subject to approval by the Secretary 
of the Interior to provide for the Tribal Court to exercise judicial powers including 
those set forth in Section 1 of this Article. Other features of the Tribal Court are set 
forth below:

(a)  The authority of the Tribal Court shall extend to all criminal offenses 
committed by Indians which occur within the jurisdiction of the Tribe and all 
civil matters occurring within the Tribe's jurisdiction.

(b)  The duties and procedures of the court or courts shall be established by 
ordinance of the Tribal Council, which shall also include the tenure and 
compensation for tribal judges.

(c)  The tribal court shall consist of a Chief Judge and two (2) Associate Judges, 
appointed by the Chairman of the Tribal Council and confirmed by a 
majority vote of the Tribal Council.

(d) 

In order to qualify for appointment to the Tribal Court, a person must meet 
the requirements set forth in Section 5 of Article VII, except that he/she 
must be at least thirty (30) years-of-age and not more than seventy (70) 
years of age.

(e)  Tribal judges may be unseated from their positions only by expiration of 
their term of appointment or by the removal or forfeiture provision of 
Article IX.

(f) 

The judicial ordinance may include provisions for a Tribal Police Force.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The Chairman. The Chairman of the Tribal Council shall preside over all 
Tribal Council and General Council meetings of the Tribe, except as otherwise provided 
in this Constitution. The Chairman shall be allowed to vote only in case of a tie, except 
as provided in Article IX, Section 2, and in the elections of the Tribal Council, and shall 
exercise only the authority specifically delegated by the Tribal Council or as otherwise 
provided by this Constitution. The Chairman shall have general supervision over the 
affairs of the Tribal Council and shall perform all duties pertaining to the office of the 
Chairman.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman. The Vice-Chairman of the Tribal Council shall assist the 
Chairman when called upon to do so. In the temporary absence of the Chairman, the 

Vice-Chairman shall preside, and when so presiding, shall have the rights, privileges, 
and duties, as well as the responsibilities of the Chairman. In the event of an extended 
absence or inability of the Chairman to perform the duties as Chairman, and when the 
office if for either of these reasons declared by a majority vote of the Tribal Council to 
be vacant, the Vice-Chairman shall automatically succeed the Chairman and inherit the 
designated duties and responsibilities of that position. The Vice-Chairman shall assume 
the office of Chairman in the event of a permanent vacancy in the office of Chairman 
until such time the vacancy is filed pursuant to Section 1 of Article IX.

Sec. 3. The Secretary. The Secretary of the Tribal Council shall correctly record the 
proceedings of all meetings of the Tribal Council and the General Council. The 
Secretary shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of correspondence 
pertaining to the business of the Tribal Council. The Secretary shall make out the order 
of business at the direction of the Chairman, shall notify Tribal Council members of 
their appointments, and shall have custody on behalf of the Tribe of the records and 
papers of the Tribe.

The Secretary shall keep a correct list and terms of members of the Tribal Council, 
shall authenticate accounts or order of the Tribal Council and in the absence of the 
Chairman and Vice-Chairman, shall call either the Tribal Council or the General 
Council meeting to order until a Chairman Pro Tempore is selected. The Secretary 
shall read the minutes of the previous meeting. At the expiration of the term of office, 
all records, equipment, supplies and tribal papers in the possession of the Secretary 
shall immediately be turned over to the successor. The records which are the 
responsibility of the Secretary, shall be maintained at the tribal office. The Secretary 
shall issue notices of General Council meetings and make available by public announce
ment the anticipated agenda of such meetings.

In the event of an extended absence or inability of the Secretary to perform the 
Secretary's duty, and when the office is for either of these reasons declared by a 
majority vote of the Tribal Council to be vacant, the Treasurer shall assume the 
designated duties of office of the Secretary until such time as the vacancy is filled by 
an election or appointment of a new Secretary according to Section 1, Article IX. In 
the event the Treasurer is absent, the Tribal Council may designate another member of 
the Tribal Council as acting Secretary on a one-meeting basis.

Sec. 4. The Treasurer. The Treasurer of the Tribal Council shall be responsible for 
each yearly budget allowance received by the Tribal Council and shall keep an accurate 
account of all receipts and disbursements from this budget allowance. The Treasurer 
shall make appropriate reports (of all accounts) to the Tribal Council and present 
summary reports at meetings of the General Council. The accounts and records of the 
Tribal Council shall be open at all times for inspection and audit by the Assistant 
Secretary - Indian Affairs or his authorized representative. The records of the 
Treasurer shall be subject to audit or inspection at the discretion of the Tribal Council. 
All tribal funds entrusted to the care of the Treasurer shall be kept in a special account 
in a bank authorized by the Tribal Council and all disbursements therefrom shall be 
made by check with the checks to be countersigned by the Chairman.

The Treasurer shall have a position surety bond satisfactory to the Tribal Council. The 
cost of all tribal surety bonds shall be paid from tribal funds. All disbursements from 

tribal funds shall be made under authority of a properly executed resolution. In the 
event of an extended absence or inability of the Treasurer to perform the Treasurer's 
duties, and when the office is otherwise declared by a majority vote of the Tribal 
Council to be temporarily or permanently vacant, the designated duties of the 
Treasurer shall be assumed by other members of the Tribal Council in the following 
order:

1. 
2. 

The Secretary
One of the three (3) Tribal Council members who shall be properly bonded, 
and shall serve until a new Treasurer has been elected or appointed 
according to Section 1, Article IX.

Sec. 5. Appointive Committees. The duties of all appointive committees and officers 
shall be clearly defined by an ordinance or administrative guidelines at the time of their 
creation or appointment. Such committees or officers shall report from time to time, 
as required, to the Tribal Council; their activities and decisions shall be subject to 
review by the Tribal Council upon petition of any person aggrieved.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 Section 1. Resolution. All final decisions of the Tribal Council on matters of 
temporary interest or matters relating to particular circumstances, officials or 
individuals shall be embodied in resolutions. Every resolution shall begin with the 
words, "Now, therefore, be it resolved by the Tribal Council of the Otoe-Missouria 
Tribe of Indians."

Sec. 2. Ordinances. On going matters necessary to the orderly administration of tribal 
affairs, shall be embodied in ordinances. Every ordinance shall begin, "Be it enacted by 
the Tribal Council of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians."
 
 

ARTICLE XV - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a valid petition signed by at least 
three hundred (300) qualified voters, and, if approved by the Secretary of the Interior, 
shall be submitted to a referendum of the qualified voters of the Tribe pursuant to 
regulations of the Secretary (25 CFR Part 81 and 82) and shall become effective when 
ratified by a majority vote of those voting in the election; provided, that at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall cast ballots in such election.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - RATIFICATION

 
 This Constitution, when approved by the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians voting at an 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall cast their ballots, shall be effective from 
the date of ratification.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, __  John W. Fritz___ , Deputy Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs 
(Operations) by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the 
Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), as amended, and delegated to me by 209 D.M. 8.3, 
do hereby approve this Constitution of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians. It shall 
become effective upon ratification by the qualified voters of the Tribe in an election in 
which at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote cast ballots; provided, that 
nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this
Constitution that would be contrary to Federal Law.

Deputy Assistant Secretary 

Indian Affairs (Operations)

Washington, D.C.

Date: OCT 06 1983
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - CERTIFICATE OF RATIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved by John W. Fritz, Deputy Assistant

Secretary - Indian Affairs (Operations), on October 6, 1983, this Constitution of 

the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians was submitted for ratification to the qualified

voters of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe of Indians and was on February 4, 1984,

duly ratified by a vote of 98 for, and 49 against, in an election in

which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 256 entitled to vote cast their ballots 

in an election called for that purpose.

Date: 

February 4, 1984

June 10, 1949

William Wade Head
Supt., Western Okla. Consolidated Agcy

My dear Mr. Head:

This will refer to your letter of May 3, enclosing copies 

of the minutes of a meeting of the Otoe and Missouria 
General Council held on February 24, 1949, and copies of 
the resolution passed at this meeting governing membership 
in the tribe.

The resolution adopted by the Otoe and Missouria Tribe 

provides that the membership of the tribe shall be all 
persons living on the effective date of the resolution whose 
names appear on the official per capita roll of March 14, 
1938, and all children of 1/4 or more Otoe and Missouria 
blood living on the effective date of the resolution who were 
born subsequent to the closing of the per capita roll of 
March 14,. 1938, and. whose parent or parents are enrolled 
in the said per capita roll. The resolution also provides 
that children born after the effective date of the resolution 
who are of 1/4 or more Otoe and Missouria Indian blood and 
whose parents are enrolled shall be enrolled as members of 
the tribe. Section No. 2 provides for the removal of the 
names of deceased persons from the tribal roll. Section 5 
provides that no person born subsequent to the closing of 
the per capita payment roll of 1933 possessing less than 
1/4 Otoe and Missouria Indian blood shall be enrolled.

The tribal council is authorized to appoint three qualified 

members of the tribe to serve as a membership committee. 
This committee, with the advice and assistance of the 
Officer in Charge of the Pawnee Sub-agency, shall consider 
all applications for enrollment and. submit them with 
recommendations to the tribal council for action. Every 
allegation of fact made by or on behalf of an applicant for 
membership shall be under oath and in all cases the burden 

of proof shall be on the applicant.

The resolution states that the Indian Claims Commission 
has requested that a roll be prepared and submitted as a part 

of the record in the suit pending before the Commission. 
In accordance with the request of the Commission, the 
Otoe and Missouria Tribe adopted the resolution of 
February 24 in order to prepare a membership roll 
listing the members of the tribe.

I find no objection to the resolution setting forth the 
membership requirements of the Otoe and Missouria Tribe 
and it is hereby approved.

Sincerely yours, 

(sgd) William E. Warne

Assistant Secretary of the Interior
 
 

RESOLUT ION

 
 WHEREAS: there are now pending before the Indian 

Claims Commission certain claims of the 
Otoe-Missouri Tribe against the United 
States of America, and

WHEREAS: the Indian Claims Commission has requested 

that there be submitted as a part of the 

record in said litigation an official roll of

membership of the said Otoe-Missouria Tribe; 
and,

WHEREAS: there has been a long felt need for the prepara
tion and maintenance of an official membership 
roll from which there, may be readily ascer
tained the identity of persons entitled .to 
recognition as members of said Tribe:

NOW THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED: In a General 

Council of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe duly 
called and assembled on February 24, 1949 
that the duly elected tribal council of said 
Tribe is hereby authorized and directed to 
prepare and maintain a living membership 
roll of persons entitled to recognition as 
members of the Otoe-Missouria Tribe.

BE IT FURTHER RESOLVED: That the said tribal council 

shall conform to the following requirements 
and procedures:

1.  All persons living on the effective date of 
this resolution whose names appear on the 
official per capita roll of March 14, 1938, 
shall be entitled to enrollment and shall be 
enrolled as members of the Otoe-Missouri 
Tribe.

2.  Upon the death of any person enrolled as 
herein provided his or her name shall be 
striken from the roll.
 
 

 
 
 3.  All children of 1/4 or more Otoe- 
Missouri Indian blood living on the effective 
date of this resolution who were born subse
quent to the closing of the per capita roll of 
March 14, 1938, and whose parent or 
parents are enrolled on the said per capita 
roll shall be entitled to enrollment and shall 
be enrolled as members of the Otoe -Missouri 
Tribe.

4.  All children born after the effective date 
of this resolution who are of 1/4 or more 
Otoe-Missouri Indian blood and whose 
parent or parents are enrolled on the official 
membership roll for which provision is 
he rein made shall be entitled to enrollment 
and shall be enrolled as members of the 
Otoe-Missouri Tribe,

5.  No person born subsequent to the closing 
of the per capita payment roll of March 14, 
1938 who possesses less that 1/4 Otoe- 
Missouri Indian blood shall be enrolled as a
member of the Otoe-Missouri Tribe.

6.  The tribal council shall appoint three 
qualified members of the Otoe-Missouri Tribe 
to serve as a membership committee. The 
said membership committee shall, with the 
advice and assistance of the Officer in Charge 
of the Pawnee sub-agency consider all 
applications for enrollment and submit 
them with recommendations to the tribal 
council for action. Upon approval of the 
application by a majority vote of the tribal 
council, the name of the applicant shall be 
entered upon the official membership roll. 
The tribal council shall advise the Officer in 
Charge of the Pawnee Sub-agency of its 
action in each case.

7. Every allegation of fact made by or on 
behalf of an applicant for membership shall 
be under oath and in all cases the burden of 
proof shall be on the applicant.

The foregoing resolution was adopted by the Otoe- 

Missouri Tribe in General Council duly called and assembled 
at the Otoe Sub-agency, Oklahoma on February 24, 1949.

(Sgd)

Francis Pipe stem. Chairman

Attest:
(Sgd)

Truman W. Dailey, Secy-Treas.

