 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

OTTAWA TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED NOVEMBER 30, 1938 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1939 
 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS

 
  
  
 MAY 1 71939 
 

DIVIMON OF DOOUMENTB

 
 < CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE OTTAWA TRIBE 
iv  
 

OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the Ottawa Indians of Oklahoma, in order to take advantage 
of the opportunities of economic independence and social advance
ment offered by the Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act 
of June 26, 1936, do hereby amend our present Constitution and 
By-laws ana do adopt the following Constitution and By-laws pur
suant to that Act.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Ottawa Tribe of Okla

homa.

Article II—Object

The object shall be to promote the general welfare of the Ottawa 

Tribe of Oklahoma.

z 

Article III—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma 

shall consist of the following persons:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

census roll of the Tribe as of January 1, 1938.

(5)  All children born since the date of the said roll, both of 

whose parents are members of the Tribe.

(c)  Any child bom of a marriage between a member of the 
Ottawa Tribe and a member of any other Indian tribe whose par
ents choose to enroll said child with the Ottawa Tribe.

(d)  Any child born of a marriage between a member of the 
Ottawa Tribe and any other person^ if such child is one-sixteenth 
or more degree of Indian blood and is enrolled on the official Tribal 
roll before attaining the age of five years; if less than one-sixteenth, 
said child may be admitted to membership by a majority vote of 
the Ottawa Council.

Sec. 2. The Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regu
lations, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
covering future membership including adoptions and loss of mem
bership.

Article IV—Membership of Council

The supreme governing body of this organization shall be the 
Ottawa Council. The membership of the Council shall be all the 
members of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma: males, 21 years of age; 
and females, 18 years of age, of sound mind.

134308—39 

' d)

2

Article V—Officers

The officers of the Tribe shall be the Chief, Second Chief, Secre
tary-Treasurer, and two councilmen, who shall be elected at an open 
Council meeting by a majority vote of the membership present.

Article VI—Business Committee

There shall be a Business Committee which shall consist of the 

officers and councilmen as provided in Article V.

The Business Committee shall have power to transact business 
and otherwise speak or act on behalf of the Ottawa Tribe, in all 
matters on which the Tribe is empowered to act. The powers of 
the Tribe shall be set forth in detail in the corporate charter which 
may be requested by the Business Committee.

Article VII—Standing Committees

Section 1. Grievance C ommittee.—This Committee consisting of 
three members shall be elected by the Ottawa Council and shall not 
include any members of the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Credit Committee.—The Credit Committee shall be chosen 
by the Business Committee and shall act under the supervision of 
the Business Committee.

Sec. 3. 'Welfare Committee.—This Committee shall be chosen in 

the same manner as the Credit Committee.

Sec. 4. Education Committee.—This Committee likewise shall be 

chosen in the same manner as the Credit Committee.

Article VIII—Elections

Section 1. Regular elections of officers shall be held by the Coun
cil on the first Monday of May, 1939, and on each odd-numbered 
year thereafter: Provided, That the present officers shall hold office 
until the first regular election.

Sec. 2. The term of office shall be for two years or until their 
successors are elected and installed: Provided, That the present 
officers shall serve until the first regular election.

Sec. 3. Nominations shall be made from the floor. Election shall 
be by standing vote or by written ballot, a majority vote being 
necessary to elect. Where there are more than two candidates and 
no one receives a majority vote the low candidate shall be eliminated 
and voting proceed until one candidate receives a majority of votes 
cast. The newly elected officers shall be installed immediately upon 
their election.

Article IX—Vacancies

Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled for the unexpired 

term at any regular or special meeting of the Ottawa Council.

Article X—Removal of Officers

Committee shall investigate complaints of mis
conduct or other acts of the members of the Business Committee and 

3

upon a proper shoving shall call a special meeting of the Ottawa 
Council to act upon such complaints. Such council shall have power, 
by a majority vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him 
from office and proceed to elect a successor.

Article XI—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and the attached By-laws may 
be proposed by a majority vote of the Business Committee or by 
a petition signed by 30 per cent of the adult members of the Tribe, 
and if approved by the Secretary of the Interior shall be submitted 
to a referendum vote of the members of the Tribe, and shall be 
effective if approved by a majority vote.
 
 

BY-LAWS

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chief.—It shall be the duty of the chief to preside 
at all meetings and perform all duties appertaining to the office, 
also to act as Chairman of the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Second Chief.—In the absence of the chief or during re
moval proceedings of the chief, the second chief shall perform the 
duties of that officer. In case of vacancy, the second chief shall 
succeed at once to the office of chief until the next special or regular 
election for the office of chief.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer.—The Secretary-Treasurer shall cor
rectly record the proceedings of all meetings. He shall make out 
the order of the business for the chief, shall notify all committees 
of their appointment, shall have custody of the records and all 
papers of the Council, which records and papers shall be open to 
inspection at any time, in his presence, by any member of the Coun
cil desiring to read them. He shall keep a correct list of all members 
of the Council, shall authenticate all accounts or orders of the Coun
cil and, in the absence of the chief and second chief, shall call the 
meeting to order until a chairman pro tern is selected. He shall 
render a written report at the annual meeting and at the expiration 
of his term of office the records and all papers in his possession shall 
be turned over to his successor. He shall issue notices of all meetings 
and conduct all general correspondence, as directed by the Council 
or the Business Committee. He shall receive all moneys of the Coun
cil and keep an accurate account of receipts and disbursements.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep all Tribal moneys entrusted 
to his care in a special account and all disbursements therefrom 
should be made by check. At any time that such account shall amount 
to more than $50.00, he shall file a bond satisfactory to the Business 
Committee and the Commissioner of Iridian ‘Affairs. The cost of 
such bond shall be paid out of Tribal moneys.

Article II—Qualifications of Officers

Any person elected to membership in the Business Committee 
shall be not less than twenty-five years of age, a member of the 
Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma and a resident of Ottawa County in 

4

Oklahoma. Any member of the Business Committee removing from 
such territory shall automatically lose his office.

Article III—Regular and Special Meetings

Section 1. The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on 
the first Monday of May of each year at the Ottawa Indian Church, 
unless some other point under the Ottawa jurisdiction is specifically 
designated in the call.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Council may be called at the 
discretion of the Chief, and shall be called by him upon the written 
request of the majority of the Business Committee or the written 
request of 20 members of the Council.

Sec. 3. The principal object of the special meeting must be stated 
in the call for same and may include the words “and for the trans
action of other business that may be presented.” Unless these words 
are added, no other business can be transacted except for the object 
stated in the call.

Sec. 4. The regular meetings of the Business Committee shall be
held the first Monday in January, April, July and October, unless 
otherwise provided by resolution.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
by the chief at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon the 
written request of three members of the Business Committee.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Three members of the Business Committee constitute- 

a quorum at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Twenty members of the Ottawa Council shall constitute 

a quorum to transact regular business.

Article V—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of 
the Indians of the Ottawa Tribe voting at an election called by the- 
Secretary of the Interior under regulations which he may prescribe , 
pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 
26, 1936, provided that at least 30% of the eligible voters vote in 
such election.

I, E. K. Burlew, the Acting Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the- 
Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the at
tached constitution and by-laws of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma,, 
subject to ratification by the Tribe in the manner therein provided.
Upon ratification of this constitution all rules and regulations 
heretofore promulgated by the Interior Department or by the Office
Affairs, so far as they may be incompatible with any of 
the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws, are declared 
inapplicable to the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma.

5

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended October 5, 1938.

F. H. Daikek,

Acting Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

E. K. Burlew,

Washington, D. C., October 10, 1938.

Acting Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved October 10, 1938 by the Acting 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Ottawa Tribe of 
Indians of Oklahoma and was on November 30, 1938 duly approved 
by a vote of 93 for, and none against, in an election in which over 
30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant to 
section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 
(49 Stat. 1967). 

.
The Ottawa Business Committee.

By Guy Jennison, Chief.
L. H. Dagenette.
Fred S. King.
Dave Geboe, Second Chief.
Abe G. Williams, Secretary-Treasurer.

H. A. Andrews,

Superintendent, Quapaw Agency.

o

