 
  
 CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE OTTAWA TRIBE  
 
OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Ottawa Indians of Oklahoma, in order to take advantage of the 
opportunities of economic independence and social advancement offered by 
the Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936, do 
hereby establish this constitution and bylaws pursuant to that act. This 
document supersedes the original constitution and bylaws approved by the 
Acting Secretary of the Interior on October 10, 1938, and ratified by the 
qualified voters of the tribe on November 30, 1938.

The name of this organization shall be the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

ARTICLE II - PURPOSE

 
 The purpose shall be to promote the general welfare of the Ottawa Tribe of 
Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma shall consist 
of the following persons:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
roll of the tribe as of August 3, 1956, and/or the official Census Roll 
of January 1, 1940.

(b)  All children born since the date of the said roll, both of 
whose parents are members of the tribe.

(c)  Any child born to a member of the Ottawa Tribe and a 
member of any other Indian tribe whose parents choose to enroll 
said child with the Ottawa Tribe.

(d)  Any child born to a member of the Ottawa Tribe and any 
other person may be admitted to membership by a majority vote 
of the Ottawa Council.

Sec. 2. The council shall have the power to prescribe rules and regula
tions, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, covering 
future membership including adoptions and loss of membership.

Sec. 3. No member of another tribe shall be eligible for membership in 
the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - OTTAWA COUNCIL

 
 The supreme governing body of this organization shall be the Ottawa 
Council composed of all members of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma, 
eighteen (18) years of age and over.
 
 

ARTICLE V - OFFICERS

 
 The officers of the tribe shall be a chief, second chief, secretary-treasurer 
and two council members.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - BUSINESS COMMITTEE

 
 There shall be a business committee composed of the officers of the Ottawa 
Tribe.

The business committee shall have power to transact business and otherwise 
speak or act on behalf of the Ottawa Tribe in all matters on which the tribe 
is empowered to act.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE

 
 Section 1. The grievance committee shall consist of five (5) members who 
shall be elected by the Ottawa Council and shall not include any members of 
the business committee. The grievance committee shall resolve grievances 
of tribal members relating to the conduct of tribal officials pursuant to 
Article X; ensure that the individuals rights of tribal members which have 
been guaranteed by the Indian Civil Rights Act of April 11, 1968 (82 Stat. 
77) are not violated; and shall hear disputes arising under any provision of 
the Ottawa Constitution or any resolution of the business committee. The 
grievance committee shall be impartial in its handling of complaints. It 
shall neither solicit support for or against any grievance submitted to the 
committee. Accordingly, its members shall not sign petitions involving 
complaints to be submitted nor shall members of that committee circulate 
such petitions.

Sec. 2. The grievance committee shall be elected for a term of three (3) 
years at the annual election of the business committee and in accordance 
with Article VIII. The grievance committee shall choose from among its 
membership a chairman and a secretary and such other officers as it deems 
necessary. The grievance committee shall adopt a resolution which shall 
establish the duties of its members and its procedures.

Sec. 3. The grievance committee shall investigate complaints of mis
conduct or other acts of the officers of the tribe and upon proper showing in 
writing shall call a special meeting of the Ottawa Tribe to act upon said 
complaint. The Ottawa Council shall have the power, by a majority vote 
after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him/her from office and 
proceed to elect a successor in accordance with Article X. Should a 
member of the grievance committee be the subject of a complaint, he/she 
shall not participate in the investigation. If, within twenty (20) days after 
receipt of a valid petition asking for removal or recall of an elected tribal 
official, a meeting of the grievance committee has not been duly conducted 
with at least three (3) members of the committee present, the designated 
spokesman for the petitioners shall call and conduct a special meeting of the 
Ottawa Council, The Ottawa Council shall act on the complaint in the 
petition and its decision shall be final.

Sec. 4. When the grievance committee receives a complaint of a rights 
violation, it shall conduct a hearing with all parties present. If, by a vote of 
at least three (3) members, the committee determines that the evidence 
presented is sufficient to substantiate the complaint, the committee shall 
call a special meeting of the Ottawa Council to act upon the complaint. 
The decision of the Ottawa Council is final.

Sec. 5. When the grievance committee receives a complaint of a dispute 
arising under any provision of the Ottawa Constitution or resolution of the 
business committee, it shall conduct a hearing with ail parties present. If 
the committee determines by a vote of at least three (3) members that the 
evidence substantiates the complaint, the committee shall call a special 
meeting of the Ottawa Council to act upon the complaint. The committee 
shall make its recommendation to the Ottawa Council and the decision of 
the Ottawa Council shall be final.

Sec. 6. Meetings of the grievance committee may be called at the 
discretion of the chairman and shall be called by him/her upon receipt of a 
written request of a majority of the grievance committee or upon receipt of 
a petition signed by at least twenty (20) members of the Ottawa Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election. The first regular election of officers under this 
constitution shall take place within one hundred-twenty (120) days following 
approval of this constitution and bylaws at which time a system of staggered 
terms shall be established. At this election, the chief and two members of 
the grievance committee shall be elected for a term of three (3) years; the 
second chief, the second council member and two (2) members of the 
grievance committee shall be elected for a term of two (2) years; and the 
secretary-treasurer, the first council member, and one (1) member of the 
grievance committee shall be elected for a term of one (1) year. There
after, all terms of office shall be for three (3) years and elections shall be 
held annually on the first Saturday in May. Officials of the business 
committee and the grievance committee shall hold office until their 
successors are duly elected and installed.

Sec. 2. Election Committee. At least sixty (60) days before the annual 
election, the business committee shall appoint at least four (4) responsible 
adults of the Ottawa Council to serve on the election committee. The 
election committee shall be solely responsible for calling and conducting the 
annual election of officers and any other tribal elections which may be 
necessary throughout the year. No elective tribal official or candidate shall 
serve on the election committee. The committee shall conduct fair and 
impartial elections.

Sec. 3. Any member of the Ottawa Tribe shall be eligible to vote, 
provided the member is eighteen (18) years of age or over on the date of the 
election.

Sec. 4. Qualification of Candidates. Any member of the Ottawa Tribe 
who is at least eighteen (18) years of age on the date of the election and 
who has not been convicted of a felony in a court of competent jurisdiction 
within the five (5) years immediately prior to the subject election shall 
qualify as a candidate for membership on the business committee and 
grievance committee. Any member of the tribe duly nominated and elected 
shall have the right to hold office. The candidate receiving a majority vote 
for the respective office shall be declared elected.

Sec, 5. Nominations. Nominations for the business committee and the 
grievance committee shall be made from the floor at a general council 
meeting held solely for that purpose at least thirty (30) days prior to the 
election.

Sec. 6. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, including the first one 
under this constitution, shall be conducted in accordance with an election 
ordinance enacted by the business committee consistent with this constitution 

and bylaws. Such ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, majority 
election, tie votes, absentee balloting and a procedure for handling protests 
and resolving election disputes. It shall further provide that no write-in 
votes shall be accepted in any tribal election. Provisions shall also be 
included regarding the conduct of recall, referendum and initiative elections 
and a uniform procedure for submitting petitions.

Elections to amend this constitution shall be conducted pursuant to Article 
XV of this constitution and bylaws.

Sec. 7. Installation of Officers. All duly elected officials of the Ottawa 
Tribe shall assume office immediately upon their election.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. Removal. Each elected or appointive body of the Ottawa Tribe 
shall have the power to remove any of its members for cause by affirmative 
vote of a majority of the total membership of the elected or appointive 
body. The business committee shall enact an resolution providing for such 
removal. The procedures set out in the resolution shall be used in removal 
proceedings by each of the elected or appointive bodies. Included in the 
resolution shall be procedures for the accused to confront his/her accusers 
and speak on his/her behalf in answer to a written statement of the charges 
at a special meeting of the affected body called for that purpose. The 
accused shall be provided with the written statement of charges at least 
fifteen (15) days prior to the removal meeting. Such resolution shall further 
provide that only one (1) person from any governmental body of the tribe 
shall be considered for removal at any meeting called for that purpose. 
Should the process result in removal, no further removal shall be considered 
until the resulting vacancy has been filled. Any tribal member who has 
knowledge of wrong doing of a tribal official may file such charges with the 
appropriate body.

In the event either the accused or the accuser requests an investigation into 
the matter, it shall be the duty of the grievance committee to conduct such 
investigation and within twenty (20) days provide its findings to the affected 
body for its use in making a final determination.

In the event an official is accused of misfeasance or malfeasance in office 
and the respective body refuses to invoke the removal process, such charges 
may be submitted in writing to the grievance committee. Upon its receipt 
of written charges, it shall be the duty of the grievance committee to 
determine whether such charges have sufficient substance to warrant 
serious consideration. If so, the grievance committee shall conduct a 
hearing within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the written charges.

The same advance notification and rights of the accused apply as set forth 
in this section. If the accused refuses to attend such hearing, it may be 
grounds for forfeiture of his office. If the accuser fails to attend, the 
charges may be dismissed. The grievance committee shall decide whether 
the accused shall be cleared of the charges or removed from office.

In the event a member of the grievance committe is the subject of removal 
action, the business committee shall be responsible for conducting the 
procedures stipulated above.

Sec. 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least thirty 
percent (30%) of the Ottawa Council, it shall be the duty of the grievance 
committee to call and conduct within sixty (60) days an election for the 
purpose of recall of a tribal official holding elective office. The election 
shall be conducted pursuant to the election ordinance. Once an individual is 
subjected to recall proceedings, he shall not again be subject to such action 
during the balance of his term.

Sec. 3. Forfeiture. It shall be the duty of the affected governmental 
body to immediately declare vacant any position within its body and to 
promptly fill such vacancy in the manner provided in Article X when it is 
determined that the incumbent has:

a. 

b. 

Has died;

Has resigned;

c.  Has been convicted  of a felony while in office;

Has been convicted while in office of a crime involving 

d. 
dishonesty;

Has been absent without being excused by the respective 

e. 
body for more then three (3) consecutive meetings;
 
 

ARTICLE X - VACANCIES

 
 Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled for the unexpired term at any 
regular or special meeting of the Ottawa Council. 

.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section I. All members of the Ottawa Tribe shall enjoy without hindrance 
freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and association.

Sec. 2. This constitution and bylaws shall not in any way alter, abridge 
or otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of this 
tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or the United States.

Sec. 3. The individual property rights of any member of the tribe shall 
not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this 
constitution and bylaws without the consent of such individual member.

Sec. 4. In accordance with Title II of the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1963 
(82 Stat. 77), the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma in exercising its powers of self
government shall not:

Make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of 
a. 
religion, or abridging the freedom of speech or of the press or 
the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition for 
a redress of grievances;

Violate the right of the people to be secure in their 
b. 
persons, houses, papers and effects against unreasonable search 
and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon probable cause, 
supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

Subject any person for the same offense to be put twice in 

c. 
jeopardy;

Compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness 

d. 
against himself;

Take any private property for a public use without just 

e. 
compensation,

Deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a 
f. 
speedy and public trial, to be informed of the nature and cause 
of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses in his 
favor, and at his own expense to have the assistance of counsel 
for his defense;

Require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel 
g. 
and unusual punishment and in no event impose for conviction of 
any one (1) offense any penalty or punishment greater than 

imprisonment for a term of six (6) months or a fine of $500, or 
both;

Deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protec
h. 
tion of its law or deprive any person of liberty or property 
without due process of law;

i. 

Pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto; or

Deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by 
j. 
imprisonment the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of not 
less than six (6) persons.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this constitution and bylaws shall, in the future, be 
declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision 
or provisions shall be severed and the remaining provisions shall continue in 
full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - POWERS

 
 Section 1. The business committee shall have the power to transact 
business, propose ordinances and resolutions, and otherwise speak and act on 
behalf of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma in all matters on which the tribe is 
empowered to act now or in the future, including the employment of legal 
counsel. However, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees shall be subject 
to approval by the Secretary of the Interior. The exercise of the above 
powers shall be subject to any limitations imposed by Federal Law or the 
Constitution of the United States.

Sec. 2. The Ottawa Council shall exercise those powers delegated to it 
by this constitution and bylaws.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Initiative is the procedure whereby the members of the Ottawa 
Council may exercise their right to present to the business committee 
proposed legislation and compel a popular vote on its adoption. An initiative 
is put into motion by a petition. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by 
at least twenty percent (20%) of the Ottawa Council, it shall be the duty of 
the Chief to call and conduct an initiative election within sixty (60) days 

presenting to the voters for their determination such issues or questions as 
are contained in the petition. An initiative election shall be conducted by 
secret balloting. A majority of those voting shall be required to adopt the 
proposed measure, provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible 
voters of the Ottawa Council vote in such election. If the proposed measure 
is adopted, it shall be binding on the tribe and the business committee and 
shall remain in force until amended or rescinded by subsequent initiative or 
referendum action, except as it may expire by its own terms.

Sec. 2. Referendum. At the discretion of the business committee, any 
matter within its authority may be referred to the Ottawa Council for its 
decision. A referendum election shall be conducted by secret ballot. A 
majority of those voting shall be required to adopt such measure, provided 
at least thirty percent (30%) of all members of the Ottawa Council cast 
ballots in such election. If the proposed measure is adopted, it shall be 
binding on the Ottawa Tribe and the business council and shall remain in 
force until amended or rescinded by subsequent initiative or referendum 
action except as it may expire by its own terms.
 
 

ARTICLE XV- AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this constitution and bylaws may be proposed by a majority 
vote of the business committee or by a petition signed by twenty percent 
(20%) of the adult members of the tribe, and, if approved by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be submitted to a referendum vote of the adult 
members of the tribe pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare 
Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), and shall be effective if ratified by a 
majority of those who vote.
 
 

BYLAWS

ARTICLE I  - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chief. It shall be the duty of the chief to preside at all meetings 
of the Ottawa Council and the business committee. He shall have general 
supervision of the affairs of the tribe and shall perform all duties appertain
ing to the office of chief.

Sec. 2. Second Chief. In the absence of the chief, or during removal 
proceedings of the chief, the second chief shall perform the duties of that 
office. In case of a vacancy, the second chief shall succeed at once to the 
office of chief and shall serve the unexpired term of that office.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer. The secretary-treasurer shall correctly 
record the proceedings of all meetings of the council and of the business 
committee, He shall make out the order of business for the chief, shall 
notify all committees of their appointment, shall have custody of the 
records and all papers of the council. All official records of the secretary- 
treasurer shall be open to inspection during, normal working hours by the 
members of the council at their request in his presence. In the event a 
member is refused access to such records he may request the grievance 
committee to so order. Upon such order, the secretary shall provide access 
to the requested records. These records and papers shall remain the 
property of the Ottawa Tribe. He shall keep a correct list of all members of 
the council, shall authenticate all accounts or orders of the council and, in 
the absence of the chief and second chief, shall call the meeting to order 
until a chairman pro tem is selected. He shall render a written report at the 
annual meeting and, at the expiration of his term of office, the records and, 
all papers in his possession shall be turned over "to his successor or the 
business committee. He shall issue notices of all meetings and conduct all 
general correspondence as directed by the council or the business commit
tee.

The secretary-treasurer shall be the custodian of all monies in possession of 
the council. He shall keep an accurate account of all receipts and shall 
disburse the same as directed by the business committee. The secretary- 
treasurer shall keep all tribal monies entrusted to his care in a special 
account and ail disbursements therefrom shall be made by check. He shall 
be bonded and the cost of such bond shall be paid out of tribal monies. He 
shall have conducted by a Certified Public Accountant of the Bureau of 
Indian Affairs at least once a year.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Regular meetings of the Ottawa Council shall be held annually in 
May the exact dates to be determined by the chief. Appropriate notice of 
the time and place of all annual and special meetings shall be given by the 
secretary-treasurer of the council, through announcement in the local 
newspaper, and other media of communication, such as radio, or television, 
at least ten (10) days prior to the date of the meeting.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Ottawa Council may be called at the 
discretion of the chief and shall be called by him upon the written request of 
the majority of the business committee or the written request of twenty (20) 
members of the council.

Sec. 3. The regular meetings of the business committee shall be held 
quarterly during the first week in January, April, July and October of each 
year unless otherwise provided by resolution of the business committee.

Sec. 4. Special meetings of the business committee may be called by the 
chief at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon the written request 
of three (3) members of the business committee. If the chief fails to call 
such meeting within five (5) days after receipt of a written request, any 
three (3) members of the business committee shall be empowered to do so.

Sec. 5. The. principal purpose of a special meeting must be stated in the 
call for same and may include the words "and for the transaction of other 
business that may be presented." Unless these words are added, no other 
busienss can be transacted except for the purpose stated in the call.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - QUORUM

 
 Section 1. Three (3) members of the business committee shall constitute a 
quorum at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Twenty (20) members of the Ottawa Council shall constitute a 
quorum to transact regular business.

Sec. 3. Three (3) members of the grievance committee shall constitute a 
quorum at any meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution and bylaws shall be effective when approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the adult 
members of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma voting in an election called by 
the Secretary of the Interior under regulations which he may prescribe 
pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Welfare Act of 3une 26, 1936, 
provided that at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters vote in such 
election.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved by

Commissioner of Indian Affairs on

, the foregoing

Constitution and Bylaws of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma was submitted 

for ratification to the adult members of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma

and was on 

, duly ratified/rejected by a vote of

________  for, and ______  against, in an election in which at

(number) 

(number)

least thirty percent (30%) of the ______  entitled to vote cast their

(number)

ballots in accordance with an election called for that purpose.

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

Election Board Member
 
 

 
APPROVAL

I,

 
 Acting Deputy

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted to the

Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), as 

amended, and delegated to me by 230 D.M. 1.1, do hereby approve the

Constitution and Bylaws of the Ottawa Tribe of Oklahoma provided that 

nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 

the constitution and bylaws that would be contrary to Federal Law.

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.

Date: OCT 15 1979

