 
  
  
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

OF THE PASSAMAQUODDY TRIBE

 
 NOVEMBER 10, 1993 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 WE, the MEMBERS of the PASSAMAQUODDY TRIBE, People of the 
Dawn, adopt this Constitution to further enhance our 
democratic form of tribal government; to protect our 
sovereignty and freedom of self-determination; to preserve our 
heritage and culture for our children and for dur future 
generations; to insure equal rights for all members of the 
tribe; and to create fair opportunities for the economic and 
domestic well-being of all members of the Passamaquoddy Tribe.

ARTICLE I. NAME.

The name of the Tribe shall be the Passamaquoddy Tribe, 

hereinafter referred to as the "Tribe.”

ARTICLE II. TRIBAL JURISDICTION.

Section I. Scope.

The authority of the government established by this 
Constitution shall extend over all members of the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe and all persons, subjects, territory and 
property now or hereafter included within the jurisdiction of 
the Passamaquoddy Tribe.

Section 2. Sovereign Immunity.

As a sovereign Indian Tribe in existence from time 
immemorial, the Tribe possesses the sovereign immunity from 
suit recognized by the applicable law of the United States, 
including immunity from suit in the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court.

However, in order to protect the individual rights 
established by this Constitution, the Tribe shall be subject 
to suit in the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court in any suit arising 
under Article IV, Section 1 of this Constitution or the Indian 
Civil Rights Act, provided that the Tribe's immunity is waived 
only to the extent that damages may be awarded in an amount of 
not more than fifty thousand dollars for any and all claims of 
any one party arising out of the same course of conduct, 
transaction or occurrence, or any larger amount that the Joint 
Tribal Council may hereafter establish by ordinance.

The Tribe shall otherwise be subject to suit only in the 
manner and to the extent expressly authorized by action of the 
Joint. Tribal Council.

Any suit for injunctive and prospective relief against a 
tribal official to enforce the terms of this Constitution or 
tribal law shall not be deemed a suit against the Tribe, and 
is not barred by this Section.

ARTICLE III. TRIBAL MEMBERSHIP.

Section 1.  Requirements for Membership.

The membership of the Tribe shall consist of all persons 

who:

(a)  possess at least one-quarter degree Passamaquoddy 

Indian ancestry; and

(b)  are not members of any other Indian tribe; and

(c)  have not relinquished their membership in the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe by signing a document to that effect and 
delivering it to the Tribe, or by maintaining membership in 
another tribe, provided that a former member may reapply for 
membership upon his or her revoking the signed resignation or 
forsaking membership in another tribe.

Blood quantum shall be determined in accordance with the 
1900 Tribal Census and all persons listed as Passamaquoddy on 
the 1900 Tribal Census shall be considered to be of 100% 
Passamaquoddy Indian ancestry.

Section 2.  Tribal Membership Ordinance.

Membership shall be determined under the Tribe’s current

Membership Ordinance, as it may be amended from time to time.

The Tribal Membership Ordinance shall provide procedures for 
determining all questions of membership, including but not 
limited to:

(a)  procedures for application for membership, for 
addition or removal of names from the Tribal Census., for 
listing the degree of Passamaquoddy Indian blood possessed by 
members, for establishment of an annual Tribal Census, for 
verification of application or other information, including 
the issuance of subpoenas by the Joint Census Committee and 
their enforcement by the Tribal Court, and for such other 
matters as are necessary to determine questions of membership;

(b)  procedures for determination of membership questions 
by a Joint Census Committee, which shall consist of three 
tribal members from each reservation, elected to staggered 
terms of four years, and one member of the Council from each 
reservation appointed by his or her Council, which appointees 
shall serve as co-chairs of the Joint Census Committee during 
their respective Council terms, and are entitled to vote only 
when presiding and to break a tie vote, provided that the 
appointed Census Committee members of the respective 
reservations shall constitute the Joint Census Committee until 
replaced by elections conducted pursuant to the Tribal 
Membership Ordinance;

(c)  requirements for reporting of information by members 

of the Tribe in order to maintain and update the Tribal Census;

(d)  criteria for meeting the requirements for membership 
set forth in Section One of this Article, which criteria shall 
be the same at both reservations, and for abandonment of 
membership and for restoration to membership, and for 
correction of any Tribal Census;

(e)  provision for registering each member as a member of 
either the Pleasant Point Passamaquoddy Reservation or the 
Indian Township Passamaquoddy Reservation for purposes of 
determining voting rights and any other matters dependent on 
membership in either reservation;

(f)  provision for appeal, within a fixed time, of 
decisions of the Joint Census Committee on questions of 
membership by any person whose application for membership is 
denied, or by any tribal member with respect to any membership 
application granted, to the Tribal Court for judicial review, 
in which the decision shall be reversed only if it is found to 
be arbitrary.

ARTICLE IV. INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS.

Section 1.  Civil Rights.

The Tribe, in exercising its powers of self-government, 

shall not:

(a)  make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise 
of religion, or abridging the freedom of speech, or the press, 
or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to 
petition for a redress of grievances;

(b)  violate the right of the people to be secure in their 
persons, houses, papers and effects against unreasonable 
search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon probable 
cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly 
describing the place to be searched and the person or thing to 
be seized;

(c)  subject any person for the same offense to be twice 

put in jeopardy;

(d)  compel any person in any criminal case to be a 

witness against himself or herself;

(e)  take any private property for a public use without 

due process of law and just compensation;

(f)  deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right 
to a speedy and public trial, to be informed of the nature and 
cause of the accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses 
against him or her, to have compulsory process for obtaining 
witnesses in his or her favor, to have the assistance of 
counsel for his or her defense, and to have counsel appointed 
for any indigent member in any action in which he or she faces 
possible incarceration;

(g)  require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, 
inflict cruel and unusual punishments, and in no event impose 
for conviction of any one offense any penalty or punishment 
greater than imprisonment for a term of one year and a fine of 
$5,000 or both, or such other penalties as may be provided by 
the Indian Civil Rights Act;

(h)  deny to a person subject to its jurisdiction the 
equal protection of its laws or deprive any persons of liberty 
or property without due process of law;

(i)  pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law, or 

any law impairing the obligation of contracts; and

(j)  deny to any person accused of an offense punishable 
by imprisonment, the right, upon request, to trial by jury of 
not less than six (6) Passamaquoddy tribal members, or, if 
enough tribal members cannot be found to fill an impartial 
jury, members of Maine Indian tribes.

Section 2.  Banishment.

No officer or entity of tribal government shall have the 
power of banishment over tribal members, except as authorized 
by ordinance approved by referendum vote.

Section 3.  Access to Governmental Records and Proceedings.

Records of official governmental actions shall be open to 

inspection by tribal members except particular records that:

(a)  are expressly made confidential by a tribal ordinance 
duly enacted to give protection to personal privacy or 
reasonable protection to business or trade secrets of the 
tribe, or

(b)  are expressly made confidential by applicable federal 

or state law, or

(c)  would be confidential if such records were records of 

the federal government.

Meetings of official bodies of the tribal government shall 
be open to tribal members, provided however that discussions 
may be held in closed session as authorized by this 
Constitution, by a tribal ordinance duly enacted or by 
applicable federal or state law, as long as any decision is 
made in open session. Any tribal member shall be entitled to 
attend any meeting of the Joint Tribal Council, of either 
Governor and Council, and of any other official committee or 
body of the tribal government, except as otherwise provided 
herein. Any minutes of such meetings shall be prepared 
promptly and shall be open to inspection by any tribal member.

ARTICLE V. JOINT TRIBAL COUNCIL.

Section 1.  Powers of the Joint Tribal Council.

The Joint Tribal Council of the Passamaquoddy Tribe shall 
have and exercise all sovereign and governmental powers and 
rights of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, including, without 

limitation, the authority to negotiate with the Federal, State 
and local governments, except as follows:

(a) 

those powers conferred by this Constitution upon the 
Tribal Court, the Joint Census Committee, the Clerks of the 
Joint Tribal Council, or upon the Sakomak (Governors), 
Leptanetok (Lieutenants) or the Governor and Council of the 
separate reservations, or upon any other body or officer of 
the tribe, whether acting jointly or as part of the tribal 
government of either reservation, shall be exercised 
exclusively by those bodies or officers;

(b)  no regulation or ordinance of the Tribe or the Joint 
Tribal Council shall be valid unless a public hearing on the 
proposed regulation or ordinance has been held on each 
reservation prior to the adoption thereof, and unless seven 
days advance notice of the hearing was conspicuously posted on 
each reservation, stating the time, place and purpose of the 
hearing;

(c)  no ordinance which affects solely one reservation of 
the Tribe shall be adopted without the consent of the Council 
of that reservation;

(d)  no tax shall be imposed by the Joint Tribal Council on 
tribal members (other than motor vehicle and snowmobile excise 
and sales taxes) unless approved pursuant to Article VIII;

(e)  no interest in real property within Passamaquoddy 
Indian Territory may be conveyed unless approved pursuant to 
Article VIII, other than the renewal of camp leases to those 
persons who held them at the time the land was acquired by the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, consent to which is hereby given, 
provided that the assignment to individual tribal members of 
house lots within either reservation or of camp lots is not a 
conveyance for purposes of this provision;

(f)  no resolution or other decision authorizing the 
purchase or sale of real property outside of Passamaquoddy 
Indian Territory or the borrowing of money shall be valid 
except after a public hearing has been conducted on each 
reservation, of which at least seven days advance notice was 
conspicuously posted on each reservation;

(g)  no expenditure of tribal general funds shall be made 
except as authorized by an annual budget showing both 
projected sources of funds and expenditures. The annual 
budget shall be adopted by the Joint Tribal Council following 
the conduct of a public hearing on the proposed budget which 
shall be held on each reservation on the third Tuesday in July 

or as soon thereafter as practical, and of which seven days 
advance notice was conspicuously posted on each reservation, 
stating the time, place and purpose of the hearing; provided, 
that the said budget may be amended by the Joint Tribal 
Council at any regular meeting at which public comment on the 
proposed amendment is allowed, provided the meeting is held 
upon not less than three working days' public notice 
conspicuously posted on each reservation; and provided 
further, that the financial affairs of the Tribe subject to 
control by the Joint Tribal Council shall be subject to an 
annual audit. For purposes of this paragraph, the term 
"tribal general funds" shall include all funds controlled by 
the tribe except enterprise or federal trust funds of the 
Tribe;

(h)  members of the Joint Tribal Council shall receive such 
compensation as may be fixed by the Council, but no increase 
in the compensation of any member shall take effect during his 
or her term of office.

Section 2.  Composition and Procedures of the Joint Tribal 

Council.

(a)  The Joint Tribal Council shall consist of the six 
members of the councils of the Pleasant Point Passamaquoddy 
Reservation and the Indian Township Passamaquoddy Reservation, 
and the Sakomak (Governors) and Leptanetok (Lieutenants) of 
each reservation. No action may be taken by the Joint Tribal 
Council except at a meeting duly called and convened.

(b)  The Sakom (Governor) of each reservation shall chair 
all meetings of the Joint Tribal Council which are held on his 
or her reservation but shall not vote except to break a tie. 
In the event of the inability of a Sakom to preside as the 
result of absence, incapacity or a conflict of interest, the 
Sakom of the other reservation shall chair the meeting. In 
the event of the inability of both Sakomak (Governors) to 
chair a meeting, the Leptanet (Lieutenant) of the reservation 
on which the meeting is held shall chair the meeting, or in 
the absence of that Leptanet, the Leptanet of the other 
reservation shall chair the meeting; provided, however, that a 
special meeting may be chaired only by a Sakom. A 
non-chairing Sakom shall not vote. Both Leptanetok shall have 
a right to vote unless a Leptanet is chairing the meeting, in 
which case the chairing Leptanet shall not vote except to 
break a tie, and the non-chairing Leptanet shall not vote. 
The Joint Tribal Council shall determine which Sakom or 
Leptanet shall chair an off-reservation meeting. All votes of 
the Joint Tribal Council shall be recorded, identifying the 
position of each member.

(c)  The Joint Tribal Council shall adopt a schedule of 
regular meetings and may convene in special session at the 
request of the Sakom (Governor) of either reservation or of 
any five Council members; the agenda of each meeting shall be 
prepared by a Clerk of the Joint Tribal Council and shall 
include any matter requested by the Sakom of either 
reservation, or any member of the Council, or by written 
petition of any seven adult tribal members, and shall be made 
available to all Council members at least three days prior to 
any meeting.

(d)  Notice of any meeting of the Joint Tribal Council 
shall be conspicuously posted on each reservation at least 
three working days before the meeting, identifying the matters 
on the meeting agenda.

(e)  The presence of a quorum is necessary to commence a 
meeting of the Joint Tribal Council, and for the taking of any 
action by the Council. A quorum shall consist of eight voting 
members, at least four of whom must be from each reservation, 
and either the Sakom (Governor) or the Leptanet (Lieutenant) 
from each reservation. The officer chairing the meeting shall 
not be counted in determining the presence of a quorum.

(f)  All meetings of the Joint Tribal Council shall be 
open to all members of the Tribe; provided, however, that the 
Joint Tribal Council may, by ordinance, authorize discussion 
to be conducted in closed executive session, but no final 
action may be taken on any matter in such closed session; and 
provided further, that any person who is the subject of an 
executive session may require that matters concerning him or 
her be discussed in an open meeting.

(g)  All minutes, ordinances, resolutions and votes of the 
Joint Tribal Council, and all audits performed pursuant to 
Section 1(d) of Article V shall be recorded in writing and 
shall be available to members of the Tribe. All regulations 
and ordinances governing the conduct of non-members of the 
Tribe shall be available for public inspection.

(h)  No member of the Joint Tribal Council shall vote on 
or otherwise participate in any matter in which he or she or a 
member of his or her household or immediate family has a 
direct personal interest, including but not limited to 
employment contracts, project funding, and appointment to 
Tribal offices, committees, or boards. The term "immediate 
family" shall include a person's spouse, siblings, parents and 
children. No action increasing the rate of compensation for 
any member of the Joint Tribal Council, including either Sakom 

(Governor) or Leptanet (Lieutenant), shall take effect during 
that member's term of office.

Section 3.  Annual Membership Financial Meeting.

The Joint Tribal Council shall convene an annual meeting 
open to all tribal members to present in oral and written form 
an accounting of the financial status of the Tribe, including 
the tribal gereral funds, any enterprise and special revenue 
funds, and any other funds or accounts. This meeting shall be 
held on both reservations at least once each year, at a time 
to be fixed by ordinance, following at least seven days public 
notice conspicuously posted on each reservation, stating the 
time, place and purpose of the meeting.

ARTICLE VI. AUTHORITY OF EACH RESERVATION.

Section 1. Powers of the Governor and Council.

The Pleasant Point Passamaquoddy Reservation and the 
Indian Township Passamaquoddy Reservation are each constituted 
a public body corporate and a political subdivision of the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe, acting under the direction and control of 
their respective Governor and Council, having the following 
limited powers and authority to be exercised for the following 
purposes; provided, however, that all such powers and 
authority shall be exercised in conformity to the provisions 
of this Constitution and of the laws and ordinances adopted by 
the Joint Tribal Council pursuant to this Constitution, and 
provided further that no tax on real property may be imposed 
by the Governor and Council without approval by referendum 
under section 4 of Article VIII:

(a)  to administer Tribal government within the respective 

reservations;

(b)  to adopt local ordinances, exercise police powers, 
take private property when necessary to a public use, and 
otherwise regulate local matters which solely affect the 
respective reservations;

(c)  to negotiate with the Federal, State and local 
governments, and to contract for and receive funds or other 
services or assistance from public or private sources, or from 
the Joint Tribal Council or from tribal enterprises, in order 
to provide public services on the reservations, and to expend 
any available funds for such purposes in accordance with an 
annual budget adopted in the same manner and subject to the 
same limitations and audit requirements as provided for the 

annual budget of the Joint Tribal Council in Article V of this 
Constitution, and to advise the Department of the Interior or 
other federal agencies or representatives as to the needs of 
the respective reservations.

(d)  to provide for the economic development of the 
respective reservations and for that purpose to invest or lend 
reservation funds on such terms and conditions as the Governor 
and Council may determine and, in accordance with the 
provisions of this Article, to own in whole or in part and in 
any form, to operate, finance or otherwise promote, tribal or 
private enterprises of any type or form of organization;

(e)  to acquire, by purchase, lease, gift, will or 
otherwise, to own, hold, use, improve and otherwise deal in, 
and to sell, convey, encumber, mortgage, pledge, lease, 
exchange or otherwise dispose of property of all kinds, real 
and personal, tangible and intangible, in whole or in part, 
wherever situated, in the reservation’s corporate name and 
capacity; provided, however, that all land located within 
Passamaquoddy Indian Territory including the reservations 
shall remain the sole property of the Passamaquoddy Tribe; 
provided further, that the Governor and Council of each 
reservation shall have the power to lease tribal land within 
the respective reservations in accordance with applicable 
provisions of federal law;

(f)  to sue and be sued in the reservation’s corporate 
name and capacity to the same extent and subject to the same 
limitations and immunities as the Passamaquoddy Tribe may sue 
and be sued;

(g)  to enter into contracts other than for borrowed money 
in the reservation’s corporate name and capacity; provided, 
howerer, that any obligations incurred in such contracts shall 
be the sole obligation of the respective reservation and shall 
not obligate the Passamaquoddy Tribe nor be secured by or 
satisfied from the common property or income of the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe except as may be expressly authorized in 
the sole discretion of the Joint Tribal Council;

(h)  to borrow money in the reservation’s corporate 
capacity to the extent that recourse for repayment or other 
satisfaction of such debt is expressly and solely limited to 
particular property then belonging to the respective 
reservation or to the assets and income of particular tribal 
enterprises of the respective reservation and otherwise solely 
to the extent authorized by the Joint Tribal Council; and to 
secure any of the reservation's obligations by mortgage, 
pledge, or other encumbrance of all or any part of the 

property and income of the reservation; provided, however: (1) 
that debts incurred by either reservation shall be the sole 
obligation of that reservation and shall not obligate the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe nor be secured by or satisfied from the 
common property or income of the Passamaquoddy Tribe except as 
may be expressly authorized in the sole discretion of the 
Joint Tribal Council; (2) that no instrument evidencing the 
indebtedness of either reservation shall be valid unless it 
shall set forth expressly that the debts evidenced thereby 
shall not constitute debts of the Passamaquoddy Tribe nor be 
secured by or satisfied from the common property or income of 
the Passamaquoddy Tribe, but shall be payable solely from the 
property or income belonging exclusively to the respective 
reservation, except as expressly authorized by the Joint 
Tribal Council; and (3) that no resolution or other decision 
authorizing the borrowing of money shall be valid except after 
a fair opportunity for public comment to the Governor and 
Council has been provided, which may be provided at any 
regular or special meeting of the Governor and Council at 
which the matter was listed on the agenda, and of which at 
least three working days advance notice was conspicuously 
posted on the reservation;

(i)  to exercise all other powers which may be exercised 
by a body corporate and politic which are either necessary or 
convenient in furtherance of the powers and purposes set forth 
in this section; and

(j)  to exercise such other powers and responsibilities as 
may be delegated to the Governor and Council of the respective 
reservations by the Joint Tribal Council.

Section 2. Powers of the Sakom (Governor).

The Sakom of each reservation shall have the right and 
responsibility to chair all meetings of the Council of that 
reservation, and to carry out the policy decisions of the 
Governor and Council for that reservation. The Sakom of each 
reservation shall have principal executive and administrative 
responsibility for the operations of tribal government on that 
reservation,  to  be exercised in accordance with this
Constitution  and  with applicable laws, ordinances and
resolutions of the Joint Tribal Council and of the Governor 
and Council of the respective reservation. Whenever a Sakom 
is unable to serve due to incapacity or a conflict of 
interest, the Leptanet (Lieutenant) of the same reservation 
shall act in his or her place and exercise all powers and 
responsibilities vested by this Constitution in the Sakom. 
The Leptanet may exercise the powers of Sakom when the Sakom 

is absent from the reservation only to the extent authorized 
by the Sakom.

No person exercising the authority of the office of Sakom 
shall have or receive any compensation or other thing of value 
from the Passamaquoddy Tribe except as provided by the 
Governor and Council or as may be available under the terms of 
any tribal program open to other tribal members.

Section 3. Powers of the Leptanet (Lieutenant).

The office of Leptanet shall have no authority except to 
act for the Sakom (Governor) as set forth in section 2 of this 
Article, and such other authority as may be granted by the 
Joint Tribal Council or the Governor and Council, or delegated 
by the Sakom.

Section 4.  Composition and Procedures of the Governor and 

Council.

 (a ) The Governor and Council of each reservation shall 
consist of the Sakom (Governor), Leptanet (Lieutenant) and six 
Council members elected by that reservation. No action may be 
taken by the Governor and Council except at a meeting duly 
called and convened. The Sakom may vote only to break a tie. 
In the Sakom's absence, the Leptanet shall preside at any 
meeting of the Governor and Council. The Leptanet may vote 
except when presiding, in which case the Leptanet may vote 
only to break a tie. In the absence of both the Sakom and the 
Leptanet at any meeting of the Governor and Council of either 
reservation, the members present may select a member of the 
Council to chair the meeting, provided, however, that such 
member may vote only to break a tie. All votes of the 
Governor and Council shall be recorded, identifying the 
position of each member.

(b)  The Governor and Council of the Pleasant Point 
Reservation shall meet in regular session on the first Tuesday 
of each month, and the Governor and Council of the Indian 
Township Reservation shall meet in regular session on the 
first Wednesday of each month, at times designated by the 
respective Governor and Council. Either Governor and Council 
may convene in special session at the request of the Sakom 
(Governor) or of three or more members of the Council. The 
agenda of each meeting shall be prepared by the Sakom or the 
Clerk of the Reservation. The agenda shall include any matter 
requested by the Sakom or any member of the Council, or by 
written petition of any seven adult tribal members eligible to 
vote, and shall be made available to all Council members at 
least three days prior to any meeting.

(c)  A quorum shall consist of four members of the 
Governor and Council eligible to vote, but shall not include 
the presiding officer.

(d)  Notice of any meeting of the Governor and Council 
shall identify the matters on the meeting agenda, and shall be 
conspicuously posted on the reservation at least three working 
days before the meeting. The notice shall be posted at the 
school, the health clinic and the tribal offices, in a place 
commonly used for such notices, and may be posted in 
additional locations. In the event that one or more of the 
specified locations no longer exists, the required notice 
shall be posted at a suitable substitute location designated 
by the Sakom (Governor) of the reservation.

(e)  If, during his or her term of office, any member of 

the Governor and Council of either reservation:

(1)  misses three consecutive regular meetings of the 

Joint Tribal Council, or

(2)  misses three consecutive regular meetings of the 

Council of 

the member's

Governor 
and 
reservation, or

(3)  misses any  four  regular  meetings of  the Joint

Tribal Council in any calendar year, or

(4)  misses any four regular meetings of the Governor 
and Council of the member's reservation in any 
calendar year, or

(5)  is convicted of a felony (any crime punishable 
by imprisonment for a term of one year or more) 
during his or her term of office,

that member’s office shall automatically become vacant. In 
determining whether any attendance standard under this 
subsection is met, each regularly scheduled meeting of either 
body shall be considered, whether or not a quorum was 
achieved, but if a member's absence from a meeting has been 
authorized in advance by the member's Sakom or Leptanet and by 
two members of the Council at his or her reservation, that 
meeting shall not be included.

In the event of a vacancy occuring under this 
subsection, the Governor and Council to which the member was 
elected shall schedule and hold a public hearing on the 

reservation to address the absences, and fill the vacancy by 
Special Election as provided in Article VII, Section 4.

(f)  All meetings of the Governor and Council shall be 
open to all members of the Tribe; provided, however, that the 
Governor and Council by ordinance may authorize discussion to 
be conducted in closed executive session, but no final action 
may be taken on any matter in such closed session, and 
provided further, that any person who is the subject of an 
executive session may require that matters concerning him or 
her be discussed in an open meeting.

(g)  All minutes, ordinances, resolutions, votes of the 
Governor and Council, and audits performed pursuant to Section 
1(c) of Article VI shall be recorded in writing and shall be 
available to members of the Tribe. All regulations and 
ordinances governing the conduct of non-members of the Tribe 
shall be available for public inspection.

(h)  No member of the Governor and Council shall vote on 
or otherwise participate in any matter in which he or she or a 
member of his or her household or immediate family has a 
direct personal interest, included but not limited to 
employment contracts, project funding, and appointment to 
tribal offices or committees. The term "immediate family" 
shall include a person's spouse, siblings, parents and 
children. No member of the Governor and Council shall have or 
-receive any compensation or other thing of value from the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe except as provided by the Governor and 
Council or as may be available under the terms of any tribal 
program open to other tribal members. No action increasing 
the rate of compensation for any member of the Governor and 
Council, including the Sakom and Leptanet, shall take effect 
during that member's term of office.

ARTICLE VII. ELECTIONS.

Section 1. Qualification of Voters and Candidates.

Any duly enrolled member of the Passamaquoddy Tribe who is 
at least eighteen years of age and a resident of the 
reservation where the member appears on the membership roll, 
or of its service area, shall be eligible to be a candidate 
for office and to vote in all elections at that reservation, 
provided:

(a)  that such member has complied with any voter 
registration requirement established by tribal or reservation 
election ordinance; and

(b)  that only eligible voters who satisfy any 
applicable residency requirement, and who are unable to vote 
in person solely by reason of their status as full-time 
students or spouses of full-time students, or military 
personnel or spouses of military personnel, or by their 
physical incapacity, shall have the right to vote by absentee 
ballot, provided that an absentee ballot received by the Clerk 
conducting an election after the polls have closed shall not 
be valid; and

(c)  that no person convicted of a felony (a crime 
punishable by imprisonment for a term of one year or more) 
shall be eligible to be a candidate for or hold elective 
tribal office, unless a pardon has been granted.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Section or any 
tribal ordinance, no duly enrolled member of the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe aged eighteen or older shall be denied the right to vote 
on the adoption, amendment or repeal of this Constitution or 
any part thereof, or on any referendum conducted under Article 
VIII, Section 1 or 2.

No member shall be eligible to vote or be a candidate for 
office at more than one of the reservations during the same 
election, except that all candidates for Tribal Representative 
shall be candidates at both reservations. No member shall be 
eligible to be a candidate for or to hold more than one 
elected office of the Tribe, including school committee 
member, at the same time, but an elected official may be a 
candidate for another office without resigning from office.

Section 2. General Elections.

The Sakom (Governor), Leptanet (Lieutenant), and members 
of the Council of each reservation shall be elected to 4 year 
terms, with those of the Council members staggered so that 
three shall be elected at each General Election. A Tribal 
Representative to the Maine Legislature shall be elected to a 
term of four years at a General Election, provided, that such 
Representative shall be elected alternately from each 
reservation. The Sakom and Leptanet of each reservation shall 
reside on their respective reservations for the duration of 
their terms in office, or be subject to removal by order of 
the Tribal Court upon a determination that the requirement has 
not been met. The Governor and Council of the respective 

reservations shall schedule special elections for the purpose 
of filling vacancies or for voting on initiative, referendum 
or recall proposals. All elections shall be conducted 
simultaneously or as close thereto as practical on both 
reservations whenever such elections are to be held on both 
reservations. All elected officials shall serve until the 
certification of the results of the election of their 
successors, unless removed from office under Article VI, 
Section 4(e) or by recall, resignation or death. General 
Elections shall be held on the first Tuesday following Labor 
Day in September of each even-numbered year.

Section 3. Tribal Election Laws.

Tribal elections shall be conducted in accordance with 
this Constitution and with any applicable election ordinances 
consistent with the Constitution.

All tribal elections, including primary, referendum, 
initiative and recall elections shall be conducted at each 
reservation under the supervision of the Tribal Clerk of the 
other reservation. That Tribal Clerk shall give notice of 
each election, and shall be responsible for the conduct of all 
elections, including preparation of the ballots, maintenance 
of voter lists, issuance of absentee ballots, counting the 
ballots, and the conduct of any recount. The Clerks shall 
certify the results of tribal elections, and shall perform 
such other election duties as may be provided by ordinance.

Candidates for tribal office shall be nominated at a 
caucus held for that purpose. Primary Elections shall be held 
as necessary so that no more than two candidates for each 
available office or position appear on the General or Special 
Election ballot. Votes for write-in candidates shall be 
counted in any Primary Election, but not in any runoff or 
final election.

Any dispute arising from the conduct of any tribal 
election may be heard in the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court. If 
the Court finds that any written provision of tribal law 
governing tribal elections was violated in conducting the 
election for the office from which the dispute arose, whether 
or not the Court beleives that the outcome of the election was 
affected thereby, the Court shall give notice of the violation 
to the Governor and Council of the affected reservation and 
the Tribal Clerk of the other reservation, and a new election 
for that office shall be conducted. If the Court finds that 
no such violation occurred, the results of the election 
certified by the Tribal Clerk are final and binding.

Each elected tribal official shall swear an oath of office 
to uphold the Constitution and laws of the Passamaquoddy 
Tribe, and to honor the decisions of the Tribal Court.

Section 4. Vacancies in Office.

If a Sakom (Governor) dies, resigns, or is recalled from 
office, the Leptanet (Lieutenant) of the same reservation 
shall serve as Sakom until a successor is chosen. The Tribal 
Council of the affected reservation shall call a Special 
Election to fill the unexpired term of the Sakom, and notify 
the Tribal Clerk of the other reservation thereof.

If a Leptanet or a member of the Tribal Council dies, 
resigns or is recalled from office, the Tribal Council of the 
affected reservation shall call a Special Election to fill the 
unexpired term, and notify the Tribal Clerk of the other 
reservation thereof. In the event that the offices of Sakom 
and Leptanet are vacant at the same time, the member of the 
Council of the affected reservation who was elected by the 
largest number of votes shall serve as interim Sakom, 
temporarily vacating his or her position on the Council, until 
the offices are filled by Special Election.

If the Tribal Representative dies, resigns or is recalled 
from office, the Joint Tribal Council shall call a Special 
Election to fill the unexpired term, and notify the Tribal 
Clerks at the two reservations thereof . Any vacancy in the 
office of Tribal Representative shall be filled by a candidate 
from the same reservation as the previous Tribal 
Representative.

Any special election called under this section shall be 
held within forty-five days after the death, resignation or 
recall from office requiring the special election, or in the 
case of an automatic vacancy under Article VI, Section 4(e), 
within forty-five days after the vacancy occurs. In the event 
that recall would make it impossible to achieve a quorum 
because of vacancies on the Tribal Council, those officials 
who received the least number of recall votes shall remain in 
office until such time as successors are elected to fill their 
positions.

Section 5. Secret Ballot.

All tribal elections, whether conducted under this Article 

or Article VIII, shall be conducted by secret ballot.

Section 6. Right to Office.

For purposes of any official act, each person who has been 
or is hereafter determined by the Clerk of either reservation 
to have been elected or, if applicable, appointed Sakom 
(Governor), Leptanet (Lieutenant) or Member of either 
reservation's Governor and Council shall have the 
responsibilities and shall be entitled to exercise the 
authority of such office without regard to the existence of 
any challenge to such election or appointment, until a 
determination by the Clerk of either reservation: (a) of the 
election of the person's successor in office; or (b) of the 
person’s removal from office for absenteeism under the 
provisions of Article VI, Section 4(e), by resignation, 
recall, death or a final decision by any competent legal 
authority under applicable law.

ARTICLE VIII. INITIATIVE, REFERENDUM AND RECALL.

Section 1. 

Initiative.

Upon receipt and verification by the Clerks of the Joint 
Tribal Council of a petition bearing the signatures, from 
among the eligible voters listed on the census at each 
reservation, of at least twenty-five percent of the number of 
votes cast at the last Gubernatorial election of the Tribe on 
that reservation, an ordinance or resolution proposed by the 
people concerning a matter other than an appropriation of 
funds shall be submitted to a vote of the members of the Tribe 
at a general or special election to be called by the Clerks of 
the Joint Tribal Council and held within sixty days following 
verification of the petition. The date each signature was 
made shall be written next to the signature on the petition, 
and no signature older than one year from the date the 
petition is submitted shall be valid. A vote of at least 
two-thirds of those actually voting at each of the Pleasant 
Point and the Indian Township Reservations is necessary in a 
referendum under this section to be conclusive and binding 
upon the Joint Tribal Council.

Section 2. Referendum.

Upon receipt and verification by the Clerks of the Joint 
Tribal Council of a petition bearing the signatures, from 
among the eligible voters listed on the census at each 
reservation, of at least twenty-five percent of the number of 
votes cast at the last General Election of the Tribe on that 
reservation, or upon the request of the Joint Tribal Council 
by a majority of its total membership eligible to vote (i.e., 

all members except the two Sakomak (Governors)), any proposed 
or previously enacted ordinance or resolution of the Joint 
Tribal Council shall be submitted to a vote of the Tribe at a 
General or Special Election to be called by the Clerks of the 
Joint Tribal Council and held within thirty days following the 
Council request or the verification of the petition by the 
Clerks of the Joint Tribal Council; provided, however, that no 
such referendum shall be conducted upon an enacted ordinance 
or resolution unless the petition or Joint Tribal Council 
request is received within thirty days of such enactment. A 
vote of at least two-thirds of those actually voting at each 
of the Pleasant Point and the Indian Township Reservations is 
necessary to be conclusive and binding upon the Joint Tribal 
Council in a referendum begun by petition under this section, 
but when a question is submitted to referendum by the Joint 
Tribal Council without such a petition, approval by a majority 
vote of those actually voting at each of the Pleasant Point 
and the Indian Township Reservations is binding upon the Joint 
Tribal Council.

Section 3.  Local Initiative.

Upon receipt and verification by the Tribal Clerk of a 
petition bearing the signatures of eligible voters listed on 
the census at one reservation equal to at least twenty-five 
percent of the number voting at the last Gubernatorial 
Election of the Tribe on that reservation, a proposed 
ordinance or resolution made by the people concerning a 
matter, other than an appropriation of funds, which could be 
acted upon by the Governor and Council of that reservation 
alone shall be submitted to the voters of that reservation at 
a General or Special Election to be called by the Tribal Clerk 
and held within sixty days following verification of the 
petition. The date each signature was made shall be written 
next to the signature on the petition, and no signature older 
than one year from the date the petition is submitted shall be 
valid. A vote of at least two-thirds of those actually voting 
at that reservation shall be conclusive and binding upon the 
Governor and Council of that reservation.

Section 4. Local Referendum.

Upon receipt and verification by the Tribal Clerk of a 
petition bearing the signatures of eligible voters listed on 
the census at one reservation equal to at least twenty-five 
percent of the number of votes cast at the last Gubernatorial 
Election of the Tribe on that reservation, or upon the 
request of either Governor and Council approved by a majority 
of its total membership eligible to vote (i.e., all members 
except the Sakom (Governor)), any proposed or previously 

enacted ordinance or resolution of the Governor and Council of 
that reservation shall be submitted to the voters of that 
reservation at a General or Special Election to be called by 
the Tribal Clerk and held within thirty days following the 
request or the verification of the petition by the Tribal 
Clerk; provided, however, that no such referendum shall be 
conducted upon an enacted ordinance or resolution unless the 
petition or the request of the Governor and Council is 
received within thirty days of such enactment. A vote of at 
least two-thirds of those actually voting is necessary to be 
conclusive and binding upon the Governor and Council of that 
reservation in a referendum begun by petition under this 
section, but when a question is submitted to referendum by the 
Governor and Council without such a petition, approval by a 
majority vote of those actually voting is binding upon the 
Governor and Council.

Section 5. Recall.

Any member of the Governor and Council of either 
reservation, or the Tribal Representative shall be recalled 
from office upon a determination that the official's conduct 
in office has violated this Constitution or tribal law, or 
that the official has failed to perform the duties of his or 
her tribal office, or has been convicted of any crime during 
his or her term of office, provided that any recall 
determination shall be made only in accordance with the 
provisions of this section.

(a)  Any member of the Governor and Council of either 
reservation shall be recalled from office if the number of 
votes in favor of recall in a referendum election held at the 
member’s reservation is more than two-thirds of the number of 
voters who participated in the most recent election to elect 
the Sakom (Governor) at the member's reservation, unless a 
greater number of votes are cast against recall.

(b)  The Tribal Representative shall be recalled from 
office if the number of votes in favor of recall in a 
referendum election held at both reservations is more than two 
thirds of the combined number of voters who participated in 
the most recent election held at each reservation to elect a 
Sakom (Governor), unless a greater number of votes are cast 
against recall.

(c)  The Tribal Clerk shall call and hold a special 
election to recall any member of the Governor and Council of 
either reservation upon a written petition from the eligible 
voters of that reservation to the Tribal Clerk signed by at 

least fifty per cent of the number of persons voting at the 
last Gubernatorial Election of the respective reservation. 
The date each signature was made shall be written next to the 
signature on the petition, and no signature older than 
forty-five days from the date the petition is submitted shall 
be valid.

(d)  The Tribal Clerks shall call and hold a special 
election to recall the Tribal Representative upon a written 
petition from eligible voters to the Tribal Clerks signed by 
at least fifty per cent of the total number of persons voting 
at the last Gubernatorial Election at each reservation. The 
date each signature was made shall be written next to the 
signature on the petition, and no signature older than 
forty-five days from the date the petition is submitted shall 
be valid.

(e)  A separate petition for recall shall be drawn for 
each official to be considered for recall and shall contain a 
statement of the specific charges against that official.

(f)  The Tribal Clerk verifying the petition shall set a 
date, time and place for a public hearing on the reservation 
on the matters set forth in a petition or petitions and shall 
provide written notice to each official to be considered for 
recall. The notice shall contain a copy of the written 
petition which has named that official, and shall be provided 
at least seven days prior to the time set for the public 
hearing.

(g)  Notwithstanding any other provision of this 
Constitution, any tribal official recalled from office shall 
be ineligible to be a candidate for any elected tribal office 
for a period of two years from the date of the election at 
which he or she was recalled from office.

ARTICLE IX. TRIBAL COURT.

Section 1. Powers of the Tribal Court.

The Passamaquoddy Tribal Court shall exercise the powers 
of the judicial branch of Tribal government and shall have 
jurisdiction of all cases and controversies which are within 
the jurisdiction of the Passamaquoddy Tribe, including without 
limitation the following:

(a)  exclusive jurisdiction over all civil disputes which 
pertain to internal tribal matters, including review of 
governmental actions, all other matters affecting tribal

government, rights of membership, and ownership, descent, or 
possession of land within Passamaquoddy Indian Territory, and 
which are not by provisions of this Constitution reserved to 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the tribal councils or to 
another body of tribal government;

(b)  exclusive jurisdiction over all other civil or 
criminal cases which are committed by law to the exclusive 
jurisdiction of the Passamquoddy Tribe;

(c)  jurisdiction over all other civil cases arising 
within the Territory of the Tribe and not committed by law to 
the exclusive jurisdiction of the courts of the United States 
or the State of Maine.

Civil disputes which are within the jurisdiction of the 
Passamaquoddy Tribal Court shall, to the extent consistent 
with applicable tribal laws, ordinances, customs, and usages, 
as well as applicable provisions of federal Indian law, be 
resolved by the Tribal Court in accordance with any 
corresponding provisions of the applicable civil laws and 
remedies of the State of Maine, and such laws and remedies 
shall to that extent be deemed adopted as the law of the 
Passamaquoddy Tribe.

The Chief Judge of the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court shall 
have the authority to give, and shall give, an advisory 
opinion as to the meaning, construction or application of any 
provision of this Constitution, upon request of the Governor 
and Council of either reservation or the Joint Tribal Council, 
provided that the issue arises from actual circumstances 
involving the official functions of the Council making the 
request.

Section 2.  Composition of the Tribal Court.

The Passamaquoddy Tribal Court shall consist of a Chief 
Judge and such Associate Judges and clerks as may be appointed 
by the Joint Tribal Council. The Chief Judge and any 
Associate Judges shall be appointed for terms of four years. 
No Judge shall be removed during such term except for just 
cause following a public hearing by the Joint Tribal Council 
held on each reservation upon at least seven days' public 
notice conspicuously posted on each reservation, including at 
least at the school, the health clinic and the tribal offices, 
and notice to the Judge whose removal is to be considered, 
which notices shall include the time and place of hearing, and 
specific charges to be considered at such hearing. A Judge 
may be removed for just cause following such public hearing by 
a unanimous vote of the Joint Tribal Council and any such 

decision by the Joint Tribal Council shall not be subject to 
judicial review. The term "just cause” shall include 
involvement in tribal politics in any manner other than by 
acting as a judge in any case properly presented to the Tribal 
Court. The salary or hourly fee paid to a judge may not be 
reduced during his or her term of office.

Associate Judges shall be nominated by the Chief Judge. 
No person shall be eligible to serve as a judge of the 
Passamaquoddy Tribal Court who is not a member in good 
standing of a bar of the highest court of one of the states of 
the United States, and no person shall remain as a judge of 
the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court who does not become and remain 
a member in good standing of the bar of the Supreme Judicial 
Court of the State of Maine within one year after becoming 
such a judge.

Section 3.  Rules of the Tribal Court.

The Chief Judge of the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court shall 
adopt Rules for the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court to govern 
procedures before the Court which shall be designed to ensure 
fair, convenient, simplified and prompt resolution of 
disputes. The Chief Judge shall also supervise the judicial 
business of the Tribal Court, including assignment of cases, 
hiring and supervision of court personnel, and other 
administrative affairs of the court.

Section 4.  Appellate Branch of the Tribal Court.

The Joint Tribal Council shall establish an Appellate 
Branch of the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court to hear appeals from 
the decisions of the Tribal Court under such Rules of 
Procedure as are established by the Tribal Court. The said 
Appellate Branch shall be composed of no less than one and no 
more than three judges, all of whom shall meet the 
qualifications for judges appointed pursuant to Section 2 of 
this Article. The Joint Tribal Council shall appoint the 
Judge or Judges of the Appellate Branch (following nomination 
by the Chief Judge of the Tribal Court) for a fixed term as 
provided in section 1 of this Article, and may remove such 
Judge or Judges only as provided in that section. The salary 
or fee of an appellate judge of the Tribal Court may not be 
reduced during his or her term of office.

ARTICLE X. ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION AND INITIAL ELECTION.

Section 1.  Adoption.

This Constitution shall become supreme law of the Tribe 
when adopted by a majority of the adult members of the Tribe 
actually voting at a referendum called for that purpose at the 
request of the Joint Tribal Council, provided that the 
Constitution is approved by a majority of those tribal members 
actually voting at each of the Pleasant Point and the Indian 
Township Reservations. Upon adoption, this Constitution shall 
supersede any prior Constitution adopted for the Tribe or at 
either reservation thereof.

Section 2.  Interim Officers and Initial Election.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, 
upon adoption of this Constitution the existing Sakomak 
(Governors), Leptanetok (Lieutenants), and Council Members of 
the respective reservations and the Tribal Representative 
shall assume all of the powers and duties of such officers as 
set forth in this Constitution, including those powers and 
duties exercised in their capacity as the Joint Tribal Council 
and Tribal Representative, and shall exercise those powers and 
duties until their resignation or removal from office, or the 
installation of their successors in office, under the terms of 
this Constitution and the laws of the Passamaquoddy Tribe.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, 
upon adoption of this Constitution the existing Clerks of each 
reservation and of the Joint Tribal Council shall assume all 
of the powers and duties of such officers as set forth in this 
Constitution, and shall exercise those powers and duties until 
their resignation or removal from office, or the installation 
of their successors in office, under the terms of this 
Constitution and the laws of the Passamaquoddy Tribe.

The said Joint Tribal Council shall provide for the 
conduct of the initial elections in accordance with Article 
VII of this Constitution. The officers elected at such first 
election shall continue until the certification of the results 
of the succeeding elections which shall be held as provided in 
Article VII of this Constitution, provided that the Tribal 
Representative elected at the initial Gubernatorial Election 
shall be elected from those eligible to vote at the Pleasant 
Point Reservation. The term of office of any tribal official 
serving at the time of the adoption of this Constitution shall 
not be extended or otherwise affected by this provision.

Section 3. Interim Ordinances.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, 
the By-laws and any ordinance previously adopted by the Joint 
Tribal Council or by the Governor and Council of either 
reservation and in effect at the time of the adoption of this 
Constitution, shall remain in full force and effect according 
to its terms until it is amended or repealed in accordance 
herewith, except to the extent that it may be inconsistent 
with the rights and privileges secured by this Constitution.

Section 4. Interim Tribal Court Judge.

Notwithstanding any other provision of this Constitution, 
any Judge of the Passamaquoddy Tribal Court who holds that 
office at the time this Constitution is adopted shall 
immediately assume all powers and duties of that office as set 
forth in this Constitution, and shall continue in that office 
until one year after the first general election held under 
this Constitution, unless sooner removed from office as 
provided in Article IX.

ARTICLE XI. AMENDMENT.

Section 1. Periodic Review.

In June of each of the first five years after the adoption 
of this Constitution, and in June of every even-numbered year 
thereafter, the terms and operation of this Constitution shall 
be reviewed by the Joint Tribal Council, following a public 
meeting held for that purpose on each reservation by the Joint 
Tribal Council during the preceding April or May. Proposals 
to amend this Constitution may be submitted to the Joint 
Tribal Council by the Sakom (Governor) or Governor and Council 
of either reservation, by the Chief Judge of the Tribal Court, 
or by any tribal member eligible to vote in tribal elections.

Section 2. Amendments Pertaining to the Tribe as a Whole.

The Joint Tribal Council shall cause any amendment 
pertaining to the tribe as a whole, and endorsed by a majority 
of the Joint Tribal Council or by written petition of any 50 
tribal members eligible to vote, to be drafted in legal form 
and presented for adoption at a Constitutional referendum vote 
held at both reservations at the next General Election, or in 
a Special Election called for that purpose in September of 
1995 or 1997, whichever shall come first. A proposed 
amendment shall become a part of this Constitution if:

(a)  during the first five years following the adoption of 
this Constitution, the amendment is approved at each 
reservation by at least sixty percent of the votes cast in the 
Constitutional referendum at that reservation; or

(b)  in a Constitutional referendum held more than five 
years after adoption of this Constitution, the amendment is 
approved at each reservation by two-thirds of the votes cast 
in the Constitutional referendum at that reservation.

Section 3.  Amendments Pertaining Solely to One Reservation.

The Governor and Council shall cause any amendment 
pertaining solely to one reservation, and endorsed by a 
majority of the Governor and Council of that reservation or by 
written petition of any 50 tribal members eligible to vote at 
that reservation to be drafted in legal form and presented for 
adoption at a Constitutional referendum vote held at that 
reservation at the same time as the next General Election, or 
in a Special Election called for that purpose in September of 
1995 or. 1997, whichever shall come first. A proposed 
amendment shall become a part of this Constitution if:

(a)  during the first three years following the adoption 
of this Constitution, the amendment is approved at the 
affected reservation by a majority of the votes cast in the 
Constitutional referendum;

(b)  during the next two years, the amendment is approved 
at the affected reservation by sixty percent of the votes cast 
in the Constitutional referendum; or

(c)  in a Constitutional referendum held six or more years 
after adoption of this Constitution, the amendment is approved 
at the affected reservation by two-thirds of the votes cast in 
the Constitutional referendum.

ARTICLE XII. RESERVED POWERS.

The powers enumerated in this Constitution are not 
exclusive and the remaining sovereign powers of the Tribe are 
reserved to the members of the Tribe. Adoption of this 
Constitution does not constitute an agreement on the part of 
the Tribe to limit the exercise by the Tribe of any right or 
power it may otherwise be entitled to exercise.

ARTICLE XIII. SEVERABILITY.

If any provision of this Constitution shall, in the 
future, be declared invalid by a court of competent 
jurisdiction, the invalid portions shall be severed and the 
remaining provisions shall remain in full force and effect.

/6833m

