 
  
 ARTICLES OF ASSOCIATION OF THE PAUMA BAND 
 

OF MISSION INDIANS, CALIFORNIA

 
 Approved June 28, 1968
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Pauma Band of Mission Indians, San Diego County, California, 

hereinafter referred to as the Band, do hereby adopt these Articles of Association 
to establish rules of procedure to govern our tribal authority and jurisdiction.

SECTION 1. Territory. The jurisdiction of the Band shall extend to the land 

comprising Pauma Tracts 1, 2 and 3 and any lands hereafter acquired.

SEC. 2. Membership. The membership of the Band shall consist of those persons 
who file applications for membership and are found qualified under one of the follow
ing categories:

(a) . Persons whose names appear on the January 1, 1940, Pauma Census except that 
where "NE” appears on Column 1 opposite the name of an individual, such per
son shall not be eligible for membership.

(b) . Persons of 1/4 or more degree of Indian blood whose ancestors are eligible 

for membership under paragraph (a), regardless of whether the ancestors are 
living or deceased.

(c) . Persons who have been adopted by the Band and such adoption has been approved 

by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

If a person who is eligible for membership has been allotted on another reserva
tion or is officially enrolled or is a recognized member of some other tribe or band, 
such person or his descendants shall not be enrolled. A "recognized member of some 
other tribe or band" is a person who, because of his affiliation with the other 
tribe or band, has received benefits or has shared in the assets of the tribe or 
band.

The official membership roll shall be prepared in accordance with an ordinance 
adopted by the members of the Band and approved by the Secretary of the Interior or 
his duly authorized representative. Such ordinance shall contain provisions for en
rollment procedures, enrollment committee, application form, approval or disapproval 
of application, rejection notice, appeals and provisions for keeping the roll on a 
current basis.

SEC. 3. Governing Body. The governing body of the Band shall be the General 
Council which shall consist of all adult members twenty-one (21) years of age or 
older. In addition, there shall be elected from the General Council a Business Com
mittee consisting of a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, a Secretary-Treasurer, and one (1) 
adult member of the Band. The Business Committee shall have the administrative pow
ers and duties hereinafter described. Members of the Business Committee shall serve 
a term of two (2) years or until their successors are duly elected and installed.

Sec. 4. Elections. Any enrolled member of the Band, twenty-one (21) years of age 

or older, shall have the right to vote and, if duly elected, to hold office. All 
elections of officers shall be by secret ballot. Nominations for the Business Com
mittee shall be made at a General Council meeting called for that purpose, and all 
nominees certified by the existing Business Committee shall have their names placed 
on the ballot. All nominations, and elections, whether for officers or by way of 
referendum, shall be conducted in accordance with an ordinance or ordinances adopted 
by the governing body which shall provide for the dates thereof, for polling places, 
election committees and their duties, absentee balloting, and other necessary re
quirements.

SEC. 5. Vacancies and Recall. The General Council may, by majority vote, remove 
any tribal official from office who fails to carry out his Business Committee respon
sibilities or is found guilty of a felony in any County, State, or Federal Court, or 
for gross neglect of duty, or misconduct reflecting on the dignity and integrity of 
the Band.

Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 30 per cent of the voters calling 

for the recall of an officer, the Business Committee shall examine the petition and 
if properly signed by a sufficient number of voters, the Council shall hold a recall 
election within sixty (60) days after receipt of petition.

Before any vote for removal is taken the accused official shall be given a written 
statement of all charges filed against him at least ten (10) days before a meeting of 
the General Council at which he is to appear and he shall be given a fair opportunity 
to answer any and all written charges at such meeting. A majority of those voting 
in such recall election shall govern, provided at least 40 per cent of the eligible 
voters shall participate in such election.

The General Council shall immediately appoint a replacement to fill the unexpired 

term of any tribal official who has resigned, died, or been removed from office.

SEC. 6. Powers of the General Council and Business Committee.

(a) 

. The General Council shall have the powers and responsibilities hereinafter 
provided, subject to any limitation imposed by the statutes or the Constitu
tion of the United States,

(1) . To manage, lease, contract or otherwise deal with tribal assets.

(2) . To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be 

subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior or his duly 
authorized Representative.

(3), To enact ordinances, consistent with these Articles of Association, gov

erning future membership, loss of membership and adoption of members in
to the Band.

(4). To assess fees for the payment of expenses of the Band or to finance any 

project which in its opinion is for the benefit of the Band as a whole.

(5). To establish its own rules of procedure for the conduct of its affairs 

and by appropriate ordinance or resolution delegate to the Business Com
mittee or any other committee any of the foregoing powers and duties.

(6). To take such actions as are necessary to carry into effect any of the 

foregoing powers.

(b). Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the General Council but not ex

pressly referred to in this article, shall not be lost by reason of their 
omission but may be exercised through the adoption of appropriate by-laws or 
amendments.

(c). Business Committee, The Business Committee shall have the following adminis

trative powers and duties, but shall not commit the Band to any contract, 
lease, or other arrangement unless it is so empowered by a duly enacted 
ordinance or resolution of the General Council:

(1). Place into effect all ordinances, resolutions or other enactments of the 

General Council.

(2). Represent the Band in all negotiations between the Band and local, State 

and Federal Governments, their agencies and officers.

(3). Faithfully advise the General Council of all aforementioned negotiations.

SEC. 7. Meetings. The General Council shall be convened in a regular meeting in 

the months of March, June, September, and December of each year on dates prescribed 
by the Business Committee, Special General Council meetings may be called by the 
Business Committee or by petition signed by 20 per cent of the voters, A meeting of 
the General Council shall not be valid unless there shall be at least 30 per cent of 
the qualified voters present, and no business shall be conducted in the absence of 
a quorum. Members will be notified at least seven (7) days in advance of all General 
Council meetings, Non-resident members will be notified by mail, those of the res
ervation by mail, telephone or visit.

The Business Committee shall meet once a month on dates to be specified by it, 

Special meetings shall be convened on call of the Chairman or majority of the Business 
Committee members, A quorum shall consist of three (3) members and no business shall 
be conducted in the absence of a quorum.

SEC. 8. Duties of Officers.

(a) . Chairman. He shall preside at all meetings of the General Council and Business 

Committee, He shall execute on behalf of the Band all contracts, leases or 
other documents approved by the General Council, He shall have general sup
ervision of all other officers, employees, and committees of the Band and see 
that their duties are properly performed. When neither the General Council 
nor the Business Committee is in session, he shall be the official represen
tative of the Band, The Chairman shall vote only in the case of a tie vote 
in either the General Council or Business Committee meetings.

(b) . Vice-Chairman. In the absence of the Chairman, he shall have the power and 

authority of the Chairman and may, if authorized by the Chairman, assist the 
Chairman in the performance of his duties.

(c). Secretary-Treasurer. He shall keep the minutes of both the General Council 

meetings and meetings of the Business Committee, He shall certify the enact
ment of all ordinances or resolutions of both the Business Committee and the 
General Council. He shall attend to the giving of all notices required by 
this document. He shall also receive on behalf of the Business Committee all 
petitions provided for in this document. He shall be bonded at the expense 
of the Band and shall have care and custody of all valuables for the Band 
and deposit all money in an approved depository. He shall disburse all funds 
as ordered by the General Council, or Business Committee when authorized to 
expend such funds. He shall maintain financial accounts, receipts, and re
cords which shall be available for inspection by members of the General 
Council, Business Committee, and representatives of the Bureau of Indian 
Affairs, All financial records of the Band shall be audited at least once 
each year and such other times as may be directed by the General Council or 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs. Copies of all minutes, resolutions, or other 
enactments shall be submitted to the Bureau of Indian Affairs through the 
Riverside Area Field Office as soon after their enactment as possible.

SEC. 9. Approval. These Articles of Association shall be in effect after they 

receive the approval of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and the present Business 
Committee shall within thirty (30) days after his approval cause an election of offi
cers to be held in accordance with the terms of these Articles of Association.

SEC. 10. Amendment, These Articles of Association may be amended by a majority 
vote of the General Council and such amendment shall be in effect upon the approval 
of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 We, 

the undersigned, duly elected officials of the Pauma Business Committee, do 
certify that the foregoing Articles of Associations were adopted by the mem

hereby
bers of the Pauma Band at a special election on March 17, 1966, a quorum voting, by 
a vote of 15 "for” and 2 "against” and 1 "undecided”.

CLETO J. FORBES, 

Spokesman

MRS. LORENA L. DIXON, 
Committeeman
 
 

EDWARD CALAC, 

 
 Committeeman

MRS. CHRISTINA V. DEVERS, 

Committeeman

(Sgd) T.W. TAYLOR,

Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Recommended for approval:

LEONARD M. HILL 
Area Director

Approved June 28, 1968.

Mr. William E. Finale

U.S. DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR, 
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

 
 Area Director, Sacramento, California 95825

Dear Mr. Finale:

We have reviewed the Articles of Association adopted by the Pauma Band of Mission 

Indians on March 17, 1966, and transmitted to us on December 8, 1967.

The Articles of Association of the Pauma Band of Mission Indians are hereby ap
proved and become effective this date with certain understandings. We urge the coun
cil promptly to adopt a resolution confirming our understandings in order that future 
interpretations of the document will be made accordingly. In view of this, a copy 
of this approval letter and the resolution accepting these understandings should be 
made a part of each copy of the governing document. We have referred to the numbered 
paragraphs as articles.

Article 2.

Section (a) 3. of this article provides for adoptions to be approved by the Bureau 

of Indian Affairs, We interpret this to mean the Secretary of the Interior or his 
authorized representative.

Likewise, since persons otherwise qualified cannot be denied membership because 
of what they may have duly inherited, we understand that property received through 
inheritance is not meant to be included within the meaning of the definition contained 
in Section B.

Article 3.

There is some question concerning the status of the fourth member of the business 

committee. Even though the article outlining the duties of officers is silent on 
this matter, we interpret Article 3 to mean there are four officers constituting 
the business committee, i.e., chairman, vice-chairman, secretary—treasurer, and a 
committee-man. We understand, therefore, that the term "officer” wherever referred 
to in the document will apply to any of the four members of the business committee,

Article 4.

The language "any enrolled member of the band” as a definition for eligible voters 
is inconsistent with Article 3. Since it may be some time before a roll is prepared, 
we understand "any enrolled member" to mean anyone eligible for enrollment as well 
as one who may actually be listed on a roll of members.

We are returning herewith for appropriate distribution, the signed original and 

four copies of the Pauma Articles of Association.

As the group operates under this document, changes can be made pursuant to Arti

cle 10 and as dictated by usage.

CC: Area Field Representative,

Riverside Field Office 

Sincerely yours,

(Sgd) T.W. TAYLOR,

Deputy Commissioner

