 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

OF THE PAWNEE NATION

 OF OKLAHOMA

 
 (Revised by Referendum vote on July 4, 1998

and as Amended on January 4, 2003)


TABLE OF CONTENTS

PREAMBLE
ARTICLE I - NAME
ARTICLE II - PURPOSE
ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE
ARTICLE IV - PAWNEE BUSINESS COUNCIL
ARTICLE V - DUTIES OF OFFICERS
ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES
ARTICLE VII - FORFEITURE, RECALL, REMOVAL
ARTICLE VIII - NASHARO COUNCIL
ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS
ARTICLE X - AMENDMENTS
ARTICLE XI - PLACE OF MEETINGS
ARTICLE XI - ADOPTION
ARTICLE XIII - SAVINGS CLAUSE
ARTICLE XIV -  SEVERABILITY
CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the four confederated bands of Indians, namely, Chaui, Kitkehahki, Pitahawirata 
and Skidi which now constitute the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, with faith in the purposes of our Supreme 
Being, with abounding pride in our cultural heritage and the determination to promote through marshaled 
efforts our social, economical and political advancement, do solemnly ordain and establish this Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma and adopt this constitution pursuant to the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 
1936 (49 Stat 1967) which shall supersede the constitution approved by the Secretary of the Interior on 
November 26, 1937, and ratified on January 6, 1938, as amended.

The name of this organization shall be the “Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.”
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

ARTICLE II - PURPOSE

 
 Section 1. To secure for the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and its members rights, powers, privileges, and 

benefits of a sovereign nation.

Section 2. To establish its Jurisdiction and Powers.

1. The governmental powers of the Pawnee Business Council, acting for the sovereign Pawnee Nation 

of Oklahoma shall extend to all persons and to all real and personal property including lands and other 
natural resources, and to all waters and air space, within the Indian Country over which the Pawnee Nation 
of Oklahoma has jurisdiction. The governmental powers of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall also 
extend outside the exterior boundaries of Indian Country to any persons or properties which are, or may be 
included within the jurisdiction of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

2. The Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered to maintain under any laws of the U.S. and/or 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma’s law and order, and judicial systems to protect the peace, safety, health, and 
welfare of the members of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, provided the concepts of separation of powers 
is maintained.

3. The Constitution is the supreme law of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and all persons subject to its 

jurisdiction. The Pawnee Business Council shall exercise its power consistent with the provisions of this 
Constitution and the Corporate Charter of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE

 
 Section 1. The current membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall consist of:

1. All persons enrolled or entitled to be enrolled on the official annuity (baseroll of the Pawnee 

Nation of Oklahoma as of February 19, 1937; and

2. All children bom of a lawful marriage between members of the Tribe since the date of said roll;
3. All children of one-quarter (1/4) or more Pawnee Indian blood bom on or after February 9,1938, 

of a lawfill marriage of an enrolled member.

Section 2. The future membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, after the adoption of this 

Constitution, shall include any individual who applies for membership and possesses at least one-eighth 
(1/8) degree Pawnee Indian Blood, aS amended on January 4, 2003 on Amendment Number 1.

Section 3. The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regulations covering 

future membership of the Pawnee Nation, including the approval and loss of membership, provided:

1. Such rules and regulations shall be subject to 1he review of the Nasharo Council;
2. A person shall not eligible for membership, if enrolled as a member of another Indian Tribe.

ARTICLE IV - Pawnee Business Council

Section 1. The supreme governing body of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall be the Pawnee 

Business Council, which shall consist of eight (8) members.

Section 2. Subject to the limitations imposed by this Constitution and applicable Federal law, the Pawnee 

Business Council shall exercise all the inherent, statutory, and treaty powers of the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma by the enactment of legislation, the transaction of business, and by otherwise speaking or acting 
on behalf of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma on all matters which the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is 
empowered to act, including the authority to hire legal counsel to represent the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma.

Section 3. All acts regarding Membership or Claims or Treaty Rights of the Pawnee Business Council 

shall be subject to review by the Nasharo Council in accordance with this Constitution,

Section 4. The present Pawnee Business Council members shall serve until the next regular election or 

until their successors are elected and installed provided:

1. The Pawnee Business Council shall provide an election commission to conduct all elections, 

provided that regular elections be held on the first Saturday in May of each odd numbered year.

2. No member of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, eighteen (18) years of age or older, shall be denied 
the right to vote by secret ballot, either in person or by absentee ballot, provided that no write-in votes shall 
be allowed.

3. Members of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, twenty-five (25) years of age or older, shall be 

eligible for election to the Pawnee Business Council. Members of the Pawnee Nation convicted of a felony 
or dishonorably discharged from the Armed Forces of the United States of America are ineligible for 
candidacy.

4. At the first regular election after the adoption of this Constitution, the President, Treasurer, and the 
First and Second Council Members shall be elected to a four year term and the Vice-President, Secretary, 
and Third and Fourth Council Members shall be elected to a two-year term in order to stagger the terms of 
office:

1. Candidates shall declare the position they seeking.
2. If there are positions which are vacant due to lack of candidates, those positions shall be 

considered vacant and filled according to Article VI.

Thereafter, all members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be elected to a four-year term of office 

and shall serve until their successors shall be duly installed in office. In cases when a vacancy is being 
filled to complete an un-expired term due to death, resignation, forfeiture, or recall of a Pawnee Business 
Council member, a successor will be appointed pursuant to Article VI of this Constitution.

5. A Nasharo Council member shall resign his/her position if elected or appointed to the Pawnee 

Business Council.

6. A Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma employee shall resign his/her position if elected or appointed to the 

Pawnee Business Council.

7. A Pawnee Business Council member shall not be eligible for employment by the Pawnee Nation of 

Oklahoma.

8. Elected members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be inaugurated and sworn into office 

fourteen (14) calendar days after the election day.

9. Pawnee Business Council records and all related documentation for each outgoing Pawnee Business 
Council member shall be made available to 1he newly elected Pawnee Business Council members. Failure 
to comply shall result in ineligibility to file for candidacy for the Pawnee Business Council for ten (10) 
years or until records and documents are returned.

Section 5. All acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be determined by a majority vote of the 
membership present, provided five (5) members of the Council shall constitute a quorum to transact 
business. In die event of a tie, the chairperson or chairperson pro tem shall cast the deciding vote.

Section 6. Regular quarterly meetings of the Pawnee Business Council shall be held on the first Saturday 

in February, June, August and November of each year in a place designated by the Pawnee Business 
Council, provided:

1. Special meetings may be called by the President.
2. Special meetings shall be called by the President within two (2) weeks after receiving a written 

request, by regular mail or by certified and return receipt mail, from a majority of the occupied Pawnee 
Business Council positions, provided:

1. If the President fails to call and conduct a special meeting as requested within two (2) weeks, a 

majority of the occupied members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be authorized to call and conduct a 
special meeting by affixing thief signatures to a document listing in detail the need for the meeting and 
citing tills Section of the Constitution as their authority to meet.

2. A minimum of two (2) days notice of all meetings, regular or special, shall be published in a 

newspaper and posted in public view. Provided, that in an emergency, posting in public view for two (2) 
days shall be deemed sufficient notice. Notice shall include the agenda.

Section 7. All members of the Pawnee Business Council shall attend tribal constitution orientation 

classes as prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The President shall preside at all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council, joint meetings of 
the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council, and all general meetings and shall vote only in the 
case of a tie. The President shall have general supervision of the affairs of the Pawnee Business Council 
and shall perform all duties pertaining to the office of the President. The President shall administer oaths 
and affirmations when required or permitted. The President shall be bonded.

Section 2. In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall perform the duties of that office. In 

the case of vacancy, the Vice-President shall succeed at once to the office of the President. The Vice
President shall be bonded.

Section 3. The Secretary shall, be responsible for the following duties:

1. Record the proceedings of all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and Nasharo Council, and 

all special meetings as assigned by the Pawnee Business Council.

2. Prepare the agenda for meetings of the Pawnee Business Council.
3. Maintain all records and files of the Pawnee Business Council. All records and filed of the Pawnee 

Business Council, except such records as shall be explicitly made exempt by law, shall be public 
information to any member of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

4. Maintain the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma official membership roll.
5. Attest to enactments of the Pawnee Business Council.
6. In absence of the President and Vice-President, call to order regular and special meetings of the 

Pawnee Business Council until a Chairman pro tem is selected.

7. Perform the duties of the Treasurer, in the absence of the Treasurer.
8. The Secretary shall be bonded.

Section 4. The Treasurer shall, be responsible for the following duties:

1. Receive funds from all sources for which the Pawnee Business Council is held accountable, and 
maintain financial records which shall reflect actual receipts and disbursements of all funds and which shall 
reflect the financial position of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

2. Deposit funds from any and all sources for which the Pawnee Business Council is held accountable 

in an insured bank or other approved financial institution.

3. Disburse by check, the funds from any and all funds for which the Pawnee Business Council. All 

checks shall be signed by the Treasurer and countersigned by the President.

4. An annual independent audit of all funds for which the Pawnee Business Council is held 

accountable.

5. Present financial status reports and budget reports as determined by the Pawnee Business Council.
6. Perform the duties of Secretary, in the absence of Secretary.
7. The Treasurer shall be bonded.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Vacancies - In the event of Presidential vacancy, the Vice-President shall immediately 

succeed to the office of the President. All other vacancies shall be filled by the President giving priority to 
the pool of candidates from the previous election, subject to the approval of the Pawnee Business Council,

provided, that such appointment shall be effective unless formally disapproved by the Pawnee Business 
Council within thirty (30) days after appointment.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - FORFEITURE, RECALL, REMOVAL

 
 Section 1. Forfeiture—If a member of the Pawnee Business Council fails or refuses to attend two (2) 
regular or special meetings per year from the date of oath of office, unless excused by the Pawnee Business 
Council President for illness or other causes for which the member cannot be held responsible, his/her 
office shall be declared forfeited by a resolution of the Pawnee Business Council and the vacancy shall be 
filled.

Section 2. Recall - Upon receipt of a petition signed by fifty per cent (50%) of the number of voters who 
voted in the last regular election call for the recall of any member of the Pawnee Business Council, it shall 
be the duty of the election commission to call and conduct within thirty (30) days and election on such 
recall. Recall shall be effective only if a majority of those voting shall vote in favor of such recall and that 
at least 50 per cent (50%) + one (1) of the number voting in the previous election vote in the recall election. 
Once a member has faced a recall attempt, no further recall action shall be brought against that member 
until at least twelve (12) months have passed. No member of the Pawnee Business Council shall be subject 
to recall action within the first six (6) months of that member’s term.

Section 3. Removal of Pawnee Business Council Members - The Nasharo Council shall investigate 
complaints of misconduct in office of members of the Pawnee Business Council and upon proper showing 
shall call a joint meeting of the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council to act upon such 
complaints. Such joint Council shall have 1he power, by a majority vote, after giving the accused a hearing, 
to remove the accused from office; provided, a quorum from each of the Councils is present.

ARTICLE VIII- Nasharo Council

Section 1. The Nasharo Council shall consist of eight (8) members with a quorum of five (5) to transact 
business. Each band shall have two (2) representatives on the Nasharo Council selected by the members of 
the tribal bands, Chaui, Kitkehahki, Pitahawirata and Skidi. The Nasharo Council shall have the right to 
review all acts of the Pawnee Business Council regarding the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma membership and 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma claims or rights growing out of treaties between the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma and the United States, provided:

1. Such acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be valid and valid unless formally disapproved by 

the Nasharo Council within thirty (30) days after such acts are referred to the latter Council;

2. Where such are disapproved by the Nasharo Council, the Pawnee Business Council may submit 
them to a referendum of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and they shall be valid and effective if approved 
by a majority vote of the adult members voting in person or by absentee ballot; provided, that, at least fifty 
(50) of those qualified to vote shall cast ballots in such election.

Section 2. The Bands of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall elect their respective representative under 

rules and regulations prescribed by the Chiefs of each Band. The representatives selected shall serve until 
the next regular selection of members of the Nasharo Council.

Section 3. Vacancies in the membership of the Nasharo Council shall be filled under rules and 

regulations prescribed by the Nasharo Council.

Section 4. The Nasharo Council shall have the power to establish its own offices and to designate its own 

officers, to fix is own meeting days, and to adopt its own rules of procedure; provided a quorum is present 
to transact business. Records of 1he proceedings of this body shall be kept.

Section 5. All members of the Nasharo Council shall attend tribal constitution classes as prescribed by 

the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Pawnee Nation shall enjoy without hindrance freedom of worship, 

conscience, speech, press, assembly, and association.

Section 2. The Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize Ihe rights and 
privileges of the Pawnee Nation as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or of tbe United States. The Indian 
Civil Rights Acts of 1968 (ICRA) and rights guaranteed under this Act is applicable to the tribal members 
and other persons within tribal jurisdiction.

Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Pawnee Nation shall not be altered, 
abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this Constitution and By-Laws without the consent of 
such individual member.
 
 

ARTICLE X - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the Pawnee Business Council or 

by a petition signed by at least fifty (50) of the adult members of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Pawnee Nation 

voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of Interior and conducted pursuant to the rules 
and regulations of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. Provided, that, at least fifty (50) of those qualified to 
vote shall cast ballots in such election. The amendment shall become effective when approved by the 
Secretary of Interior, so long as such approval is required by Federal tew, and ratified by the adult members 
of the Nation.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - PLACE OF MEETINGS

 
 Unless some other location in the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma jurisdiction is designated in the notice, all 

meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and of the Nasharo Council shall be held at the Pawnee Nation
Reserve at Pawnee, Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution when approved by the Secretary of Interior, shall be submitted to referendum vote of 

the adult members of the Nation, and shall become effective if approved by two-thirds vote of the adult 
members voting in person, provided that at least fifty votes are cast.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All enactments of the Nation adopted before the effective date of this Constitution shall continue in 

effect to the extent to that they are not inconsistent with this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any part of this Constitution is held by the Federal Court to be invalid or contrary to the U.S. 

Constitution or Federal tew, the remainder shall continue to be in full force and effect.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, NANCY JEMISON, Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the authority granted 

to the Secretary of the Interior by the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat 1967) and 
delegated to me by Secretarial Order No. 3150 as extended by Secretarial Order No. 3177, as amended, do 
hereby approve the Constitution of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. This Constitution is effective on the 
date ratified by the adult members of the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma; PROVIDED, that nothing in this 
approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary to
Federal tew.
 
 

NANCY JEMISON

 
 Acting Deputy Commissioner

Of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.

Date: April 27, 1998

Copyright Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. P.O. Box 470 Pawnee, Ok 74058
For problems or questions regarding this web contact [webmaster@pawneenation.org] 
last updated June 21, 2005

June 21, 2005
 
 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE PAWNEE NATION 
OF OKLAHOMA

 
 (Revised by Referendum vote on July 4, 1998 
and as Amended on January 4, 2003)
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the four confederated bands of Indians, namely, Chaui, Kitkehahki, 
Pitahawirata and Skidi which now constitute the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, with faith 
in the purposes of our Supreme Being, with abounding pride in our cultural heritage and 
the determination to promote through marshaled efforts our social, economical and 
political advancement, do solemnly ordain and establish this Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma 
and adopt this constitution pursuant to the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 
1936 (49 StaL 1967) which shall supersede the constitution approved by the Secretary of 
the Interior on November 26, 1937, and ratified on January 6, 1938, as amended.

The name of this organization shall be the “Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.”

ARTICLE l - NAME

ARTICLE ll - PURPOSE
Section 1. To secure for the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and its members rights, powers, 
privileges, and benefits of a sovereign nation.
Section 2. To establish its Jurisdiction and Powers.

(i) 

The governmental powers of the Pawnee Business Council, acting for the
sovereign Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall extend to all persons and to all 
real and personal property including lands and other natural resources, and to 
all waters and air space, within the Indian Country over which the Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma has jurisdiction. The governmental powers of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall also extend outside the exterior boundaries 

(ii) 

(iii) 

of Indian Country to any persons or properties which are, or may be included 
within the jurisdiction of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
The Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered to maintain under any laws of
the U.S. and/or Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma's law and order, and judicial 
systems to protect the peace, safety, health, and welfare of the members of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, provided the concepts of separation of powers is 
maintained.
The Constitution is the supreme law of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and 
all persons subject to its jurisdiction. The Pawnee Business Council shall 
exercise its power consistent with the provisions of this Constitution and the 
Corporate Charter of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

ARTICLE lll - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE
Section 1. The current membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall consist of:

(a)  All persons enrolled or entitled to be enrolled on the official annuity (base) 

roll of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma as of February 19, 1937; and
(b)  All children bom of a lawful marriage between members of the Tribe 

since the date of said roll;

(c)  All children of one-quarter (1/4) or more Pawnee Indian blood bom on or 

after February 9, 1938, of a lawful marriage of an enrolled member.

Section 2. The future membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, after the adoption 
of this Constitution, shall include any individual who applies for membership and 
possesses at least one-eighth (1/8) degree Pawnee Indian Blood, as amended on January 
4, 2003 on Amendment Number 1.
Section 3. The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to prescribe rules and 
regulations covering future membership of the Pawnee Nation, including the approval 
and loss of membership, provided:

(i) 

(ii) 

Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the review of the Nasharo 
Council;
A person shall not eligible for membership, if enrolled as a member of another 
Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - PAWNEE BUSINESS COUNCIL
 
 Section 1. The supreme governing body of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall be the 
Pawnee Business Council, which shall consist of eight (8) members.
Section 2. Subject to the limitations imposed by this Constitution and applicable Federal 
law, the Pawnee Business Council shall exercise all the inherent, statutory, and treaty 
powers of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma by the enactment of legislation, the 
transaction of business, and by otherwise speaking or acting on behalf of the Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma on all matters which the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered 
to act, including the authority to hire legal counsel to represent the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma.
Section 3. All acts regarding Membership or Claims or Treaty Rights of the Pawnee 
Business Council shall be subject to review by the Nasharo Council in accordance with 
this Constitution.

Section 4. The present Pawnee Business Council members shall serve until the next 
regular election or until their successors are elected and installed provided:

(i) 

The Pawnee Business Council shall provide an election commission to 
conduct all elections, provided that regular elections be held on the first 
Saturday in May of each odd numbered year.

(ii)  No member of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, eighteen (18) years of age or
older, shall be denied the right to vote by secret ballot, either in person or by 
absentee ballot, provided that no write-in votes shall be allowed.

(iii)  Members of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, twenty-five (25) years of age or 
older, shall be eligible for election to the Pawnee Business Council. Members 
of the Pawnee Nation convicted of a felony or dishonorably discharged from 
the Armed Forces of the United States of America are ineligible for 
candidacy.

(iv)  At the first regular election after the adoption of this Constitution, the

President, Treasurer, and the First and Second Council Members shall be 
elected to a four year term and the Vice-President, Secretary, and Third and 
Fourth Council Members shall be elected to a two-year term in order to 
stagger the terms of office:
(a) Candidates shall declare the position they seeking.
(b)  If there are positions which are vacant due to lack of candidates, those 
positions shall be considered vacant and filled according to Article VI. 
Thereafter, all members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be elected to a 
four-year term of office and shall serve until their successors shall be duly 
installed in office. In cases when a vacancy is being filled to complete an un
expired term due to death, resignation, forfeiture, or recall of a Pawnee Business 
Council member, a successor will be appointed pursuant to Article VI of this 
Constitution.

(v) 

A Nasharo Council member shall resign his/her position if elected or 
appointed to the Pawnee Business Council.

(vi)  A Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma employee shall resign his/her position if

elected or appointed to the Pawnee Business Council.

(vii)  A Pawnee Business Council member shall not be eligible for employment by 

the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

(ix) 

(viii)  Elected members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be inaugurated and 
sworn into office fourteen (14) calendar days after the election day.
Pawnee Business Council records and all related documentation for each 
outgoing Pawnee Business Council member shall be made available to the 
newly elected Pawnee Business Council members. Failure to comply shall 
result in ineligibility to file for candidacy for the Pawnee Business Council for 
ten (10) years or until records and documents are returned.

Section 5. All acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be determined by a majority 
vote of the membership present, provided five (5) members of the Council shall 
constitute a quorum to transact business. In the event of a tie, the chairperson or 
chairperson pro tem shall cast the deciding vote.

Section 6. Regular quarterly meetings of the Pawnee Business Council shall be held on 
the first Saturday in February, June, August and November of each year in a place 
designated by the Pawnee Business Council, provided:

(i) 
(ii) 

Special meetings may be called by the President.
Special meetings shall be called by the President within two (2) weeks after
receiving a written request, by regular mail or by certified and return receipt 
mail, from a majority of the occupied Pawnee Business Council positions, 
provided:
(a)  If the President fails to call and conduct a special meeting as requested 

within two (2) weeks, a majority of the occupied members of the Pawnee 
Business Council shall be authorized to call and conduct a special meeting 
by affixing thief signatures to a document listing in detail the need for the 
meeting and citing this Section of the Constitution as their authority to 
meet

(b)  A minimum of two (2) days notice of all meetings, regular or special, shall 
be published in a newspaper and posted in public view. Provided, that in 
an emergency, posting in public view for two (2) days shall be deemed 
sufficient notice. Notice shall include the agenda.

Section 7. All members of the Pawnee Business Council shall attend tribal constitution 
orientation classes as prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The President shall preside at all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council, 
joint meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council, and all general 
meetings and shall vote only in the case of a tie. The President shall have general 
supervision of the affairs of the Pawnee Business Council and shall perform all duties 
pertaining to the office of the President. The President shall administer oaths and 
affirmations when required or permitted. The President shall be bonded.
Section 2. In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall perform the duties of 
that office. In the case of vacancy, the Vice-President shall succeed at once to the office 
of the President. The Vice-President shall be bonded.
Section 3. The Secretary shall, be responsible for the following duties:

(i) 

Record the proceedings of all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and 
Nasharo Council, and all special meetings as assigned by the Pawnee Business 
Council.
Prepare the agenda for meetings of the Pawnee Business Council.
(ii) 
(iii)  Maintain all records and files of the Pawnee Business Council. All records 
and filed of the Pawnee Business Council, except such records as shall be 
explicitly made exempt by law, shall be public information to any member of 
the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

(iv)  Maintain the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma official membership roll.
(v) 
(vi) 

Attest to enactments of the Pawnee Business Council.
In absence of the President and Vice-President, call to order regular and 
special meetings of the Pawnee Business Council until a Chairman pro tem is 
selected.

(vii)  Perform the duties of the Treasurer, in the absence of the Treasurer.

(viii)  The Secretary shall be bonded.

Section 4. The Treasurer shall, be responsible for the following duties:

(i) 

(ii) 

Receive funds from all sources for which the Pawnee Business Council is held 
accountable, and maintain financial records which shall reflect actual receipts 
and disbursements of all funds and which shall reflect the financial position of 
the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
Deposit funds from any and all sources for which the Pawnee Business 
Council is held accountable in an insured bank or other approved financial 
institution.

(iii)  Disburse by check, the funds from any and all funds for which the Pawnee 
Business Council. All checks shall be signed by the Treasurer and 
countersigned by the President.

(iv)  An annual independent audit of all funds for which the Pawnee Business

(v) 

Council is held accountable.
Present financial status reports and budget reports as determined by the 
Pawnee Business Council.
Perform the duties of Secretary, in the absence of Secretary.

(vi) 
(vii)  The Treasurer shall be bonded.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Vacancies — In the event of Presidential vacancy, the Vice-President shall 
immediately succeed to the office of the President. All other vacancies shall be filled by 
the President giving priority to the pool of candidates from the previous election, subject 
to the approval of the Pawnee Business Council, provided, that such appointment shall be 
effective unless formally disapproved by the Pawnee Business Council within thirty (30) 
days after appointment
 
 

ARTICLE VII - FORFEITURE, RECALL, REMOVAL
 
 Section 1. Forfeiture - If a member of the Pawnee Business Council fails or refuses to 
attend two (2) regular or special meetings per year from the date of oath of office, unless 
excused by the Pawnee Business Council President for illness or other causes for which 
the member cannot be held responsible, his/her office shall be declared forfeited by a 
resolution of the Pawnee Business Council and the vacancy shall be filled.
Section 2. Recall - Upon receipt of a petition signed by fifty per cent (50%) of the 
number of voters who voted in the last regular election call for the recall of any member 
of the Pawnee Business Council, it shall be the duty of the election commission to call 
and conduct within thirty (30) days and election on such recall. Recall shall be effective 
only if a majority of those voting shall vote in favor of such recall and that at least 50 per 
cent (50%) + one (1) of the number voting in the previous election vote in the recall 
election. Once a member has faced a recall attempt, no further recall action shall be 
brought against that member until at least twelve (12) months have passed. No member 
of the Pawnee Business Council shall be subject to recall action within the first six (6) 
months of that member’s term.
Section 3. Removal of Pawnee Business Council Members — The Nasharo Council 
shall investigate complaints of misconduct in office of members of the Pawnee Business 
Council and upon proper showing shall call a joint meeting of the Pawnee Business

Council and the Nasharo Council to act upon such complaints. Such joint Council shall 
have the power, by a majority vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove the 
accused from office; provided, a quorum from each of the Councils is present.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - NASHARO COUNCIL
 
 Section 1. The Nasharo Council shall consist of eight (8) members with a quorum of five 
(5) to transact business. Each band shall have two (2) representatives on the Nasharo 
Council selected by the members of the tribal bands, Chaui, Kitkehahki, Pitahawirata and 
Skidi. The Nasharo Council shall have the right to review all acts of the Pawnee Business 
Council regarding the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma membership and Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma claims or rights growing out of treaties between the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma and the United States, provided:

(i) 

Such acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be valid and valid unless
formally disapproved by the Nasharo Council within thirty (30) days after 
such acts are referred to the latter Council;

(ii)  Where such are disapproved by the Nasharo Council, the Pawnee Business 

Council may submit them to a referendum of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma 
and they shall be valid and effective if approved by a majority vote of the 
adult members voting in person or by absentee ballot; provided, that, at least 
fifty (50) of those qualified to vote shall cast ballots in such election.

Section 2. The Bands of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall elect their respective 
representative under rules and regulations prescribed by the Chiefs of each Band. The 
representatives selected shall serve until the next regular selection of members of the 
Nasharo Council.
Section 3. Vacancies in the membership of the Nasharo Council shall be filled under 
rules and regulations prescribed by the Nasharo Council.
Section 4. The Nasharo Council shall have the power to establish its own offices and to 
designate its own officers, to fix is own meeting days, and to adopt its own rules of 
procedure; provided a quorum is present to transact business. Records of the proceedings 
of this body shall be kept.
Section 5. All members of the Nasharo Council shall attend tribal constitution classes as 
prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS
 
 Section 1. All members of the Pawnee Nation shall enjoy without hindrance freedom of 
worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, and association.
Section 2. The Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize 
the rights and privileges of the Pawnee Nation as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or of 
the United States. The Indian Civil Rights Acts of 1968 (ICRA) and rights guaranteed 
under this Act is applicable to the tribal members and other persons within tribal 
jurisdiction.
Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Pawnee Nation shall not 
be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this Constitution and By
Laws without the consent of such individual member.
 
 

ARTICLE X - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the Pawnee 
Business Council or by a petition signed by at least fifty (50) of the adult members of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the 
Pawnee Nation voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of Interior 
and conducted pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. 
Provided, that, at least fifty (50) of those qualified to vote shall cast ballots in such 
election. The amendment shall become effective when approved by the Secretary of 
Interior, so long as such approval is required by Federal law, and ratified by the adult 
members of the Nation.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - PLACE OF MEETINGS
 
 Unless some other location in the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma jurisdiction is designated 
in the notice, all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and of the Nasharo Council 
shall be held at the Pawnee Nation Reserve at Pawnee, Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution when approved by the Secretary of Interior, shall be submitted to 
referendum vote of the adult members of the Nation, and shall become effective if 
approved by two-thirds vote of the adult members voting in person, provided that at least 
fifty votes are cast

ARTICLE Xlll - SAVINGS CLAUSE
All enactments of the Nation adopted before the effective date of this Constitution shall 
continue in effect to the extent to that they are not inconsistent with this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY
 
 If any part of this Constitution is held by the Federal Court to be invalid or contrary to the 
U.S. Constitution or Federal law, the remainder shall continue to be in full force and 
effect.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
 
 I, NANCY JEMISON, Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the 
authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 
June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967) and delegated to me by Secretarial Order No. 3150 as 
extended by Secretarial Order No. 3177, as amended, do hereby approve the Constitution 
of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. This Constitution is effective on the date ratified by 
the adult members of the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma; PROVIDED, that nothing in this 
approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be 
contrary to Federal law.
 
 

NANCY JEMISON
 
 Acting Deputy Commissioner 
Of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.
Date: April 27, 1998

