AUG 03 1998

DATE:

reply to Area Director, Anadarko Area Office 
attn of: 

Attn: Tribal Government Services
 
 

UNITED STATES GOVERNMENT

 
 memorandum

subject: 

Secretarial Election Results for Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma

to: 

Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs
Attn: Office of Tribal Government Services

Attached is a copy of the Certificate of Results of Election for the 
Secretarial Election held July 4, 1998, on the proposed revised tribal 
constitution for the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma. The proposed revision 
was approved by over a two-thirds majority vote of 48 for and 18 
against with no spoiled ballots for a total of 66 eligible voters 
participating. Under the authorization letter dated April 27, 1998, the 
document was effective the date of ratification, July 4, 1998.

A copy of the Constitution of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is also 
attached. If you have any questions, contact Terry Burner or Suzanne 
Chaney, 405-247-6673, extension 209 or 207, respectively.
 
 

CONSTITUTION
OF THE PAWNEE NATION OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the four confederated bands of Indians, namely, Chaui, 
Kitkehahki, Pitahawirata and Skidi which now constitute the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma, with faith in the purposes of our Supreme Being, with abounding pride in 
our cultural heritage and with the determination to promote through marshalled efforts 
our social, economic and political advancement, do solemnly ordain and establish this 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and adopt this constitution pursuant to the Oklahoma 
Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat 1967) which shall supersede the 
constitution approved by the Secretary of the Interior on November 26, 1937, and 
ratified on January 6, 1938, as amended.
 
  
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the "Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma”. 
 

ARTICLE II - PURPOSE


Section 1. To secure for the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and its members rights, 

powers, privileges, and benefits of a sovereign nation.

Section 2. To establish its Jurisdiction and Powers.

(i) 

The governmental powers of the Pawnee Business
Council, acting for the sovereign Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma shall extend to all persons and to all real 
and personal property, including lands and other 
natural resources, and to all waters and air space, 
within the Indian Country over which the Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma has jurisdiction. The 
governmental powers of the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma shall also extend outside the exterior 
boundaries of Indian Country to any persons or 
properties which are, or may be included within the 
jurisdiction of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

(ii) 

The Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered to 
maintain under any laws of the U.S. and/or Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma’s law and order, and judicial

systems to protect the peace, safety, health, and 
welfare of the members of the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma, provided the concept of separation of 
powers is maintained.

(iii) 

This Constitution is the supreme law of the Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma and all persons subject to its 
jurisdiction. The Pawnee Business Council shall 
exercise its power consistent with the provisions of 
this Constitution and the Corporate Charter of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE

 
 Section 1. The current membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall consist 

of:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

All persons enrolled or entitled to be enrolled on the official 
annuity (base) roll of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma as of 
February 19, 1937; and

All children bom of a lawful marriage between members of the 
Tribe since the date of said roll;

All children of one-quarter (1/4) or more Pawnee Indian blood bom
on or after February 9, 1938, of a lawful marriage of an enrolled 
member.

Section 2. The future membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, after the 
adoption of this Constitution, shall include any individual who applies for 
membership and possesses at least one-quarter (1/4) degree Pawnee Indian 
blood.

Section 3. The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to prescribe rules and 
regulations covering future membership of the Pawnee Nation, including 
the approval and loss of membership, provided;

(i) 

Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the review of
the Nasharo Council;

(ii) 

A person shall not be eligible for membership, if enrolled 
as a member of another Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - PAWNEE BUSINESS COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The supreme governing body of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall be 

the Pawnee Business Council, which shall consist of eight (8) members.

Section 2. Subject to the limitations imposed by this Constitution and applicable 
Federal law, the Pawnee Business Council shall exercise all the inherent, 
statutory, and treaty powers of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma by the 
enactment of legislation, die transaction of business, and by otherwise 
speaking or acting on behalf of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma on all 
matters which the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered to act, 
including the authority to hire legal counsel to represent the Pawnee Nation 
of Oklahoma.

Section 3. All acts regarding Membership or Claims or Treaty Rights of the Pawnee 
Business Council shall be subject to review by the Nasharo Council in 
accordance with this Constitution.

Section 4. The present Pawnee Business Council members shall serve until the next 
regular election or until their successors are elected and installed, provided:

(i) 

(ii) 

The Pawnee Business Council shall provide an election 
commission to conduct all elections, provided that regular 
elections be held on the first Saturday in May of each odd 
numbered year.

No member of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, eighteen 
(18) years of age or older, shall be denied the right to vote 
by secret ballot, either in person or by absentee ballot, 
provided that no write-in votes shall be allowed.

(iii)  Members of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, twenty-five 
(25) years of age or older, shall be eligible for election to 
the Pawnee Business Council. Members of the Pawnee 
Nation convicted of a felony or dishonorably discharged 
from the Armed Forces of the United States of America are 
ineligible for candidacy.

(iv) 

At the first regular election after the adoption of this 
Constitution, the President, Treasurer, and the First and 
Second Council Members shall be elected to a four-year 
term and the Vice-President, Secretary , and the Third and 
Fourth Council Members shall be elected to a two-year 
term in order to stagger the terms of office:

(a) 

(b) 

Candidates shall declare the position they 
are seeking.

If there are positions which are left vacant 
due to lack of candidates, those positions 
shall be considered vacant and filled 
according to Article VI.

Thereafter, all members of the Pawnee Business Council 
shall be elected to a four-year term of office and shall serve 
until their successors shall be duly installed in office. In 
cases when a vacancy is being filled to complete an 
unexpired term due to the death, resignation, forfeiture, or 
recall of a Pawnee Business Council member, a successor 
will be appointed pursuant to Article VI of this 
Constitution.

A Nasharo Council member shall resign his/her position if 
elected or appointed to the Pawnee Business Council.

A Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma employee shall resign 
his/her position if elected or appointed to the Pawnee 
Business Council.

(v) 

(vi) 

(vii)  A Pawnee Business Council member will not be eligible 

for employment by the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

(viii)  Elected members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be 
inaugurated and sworn into office fourteen (14) calendar 
days after the election day.

(ix) 

Pawnee Business Council records and all related 
documentation for each outgoing Pawnee Business Council 
member shall be made available to the newly elected

Pawnee Business Council members. Failure to comply 
shall result in ineligibility to file for candidacy for the 
Pawnee Business Council for ten (10) years or until records 
and documents are returned.

Section 5. All acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be determined by a majority 
vote of the membership present, provided five (5) members of the Council 
shall constitute a quorum to transact business. In the event of a tie, the 
chairperson or chairperson pro tem shall cast the deciding vote.

Section 6. Regular quarterly meetings of the Pawnee Business Council shall be held 
on the first Saturday in February, June, August and November of each year 
in a place designated by the Pawnee Business Council, provided:

(i) 

Special meetings may be called by the President

(ii) 

Special meetings shall be called by the President within 
two (2) weeks after receiving a written request by regular 
mail or by certified and return receipt mail, from a majority 
of the occupied Pawnee Business Council positions, 
provided:

(a) 

(b) 

If the President fails to call and conduct a 
special meeting as requested within two (2) 
weeks, a majority of the occupied members 
of the Pawnee Business Council shall be 
authorized to call and conduct a special 
meeting by affixing their signatures to a 
document listing in detail the need for the 
meeting and citing this Section of the 
Constitution as their authority to meet

A minimum of two (2) days notice of all 
meetings, regular or special, shall be 
published in a designated newspaper and 
posted in public view. Provided, that in an 
emergency, posting in public view for two 
(2) days shall be deemed sufficient notice. 
Notice shall include the agenda.

Section 7. All members of the Pawnee Business Council shall attend tribal 
constitution orientation classes as prescribed by the Pawnee Business 
Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The President shall preside at all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council, 
joint meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council, 
and all general tribal meetings and shall vote only in case of a tie. The 
President shall have general supervision of the affairs of the Pawnee 
Business Council and shall perform all duties pertaining to the office of the 
President. The President shall administer oaths and affirmations when 
required or permitted. The President shall be bonded.

Section 2. In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall perform the duties 
of that office. In the case of vacancy, the Vice-President shall succeed at 
once to the office of the President. The Vice-President shall be bonded.

Section 3. The Secretary shall, be responsible for the following duties:

(i) 

Record the proceedings of all meetings of the Pawnee 
Business Council, joint meetings of the Pawnee Business 
Council and Nasharo Council, and all special meetings as 
assigned by the Pawnee Business Council.

(ii) 

Prepare the agenda for meetings of the Pawnee Business 
Council.

(iii)  Maintain all records and files of the Pawnee Business 
Council. All records and files of the Pawnee Business 
Council, except such records as shall be explicitly made 
exempt by law, shall be public information to any member 
of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

(iv)  Maintain the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma official 

membership roll.

(v) 

Attest to enactments of the Pawnee Business Council.

(vi) 

In the absence of the President and Vice-President, call to 
order regular and special meetings of the Pawnee Business 
Council until a Chairman pro tem is selected.

(vii) 

Perform the duties of the Treasurer, in the absence of the 
Treasurer

(viii)  The Secretary shall be bonded.

Section 4. The Treasurer shall, be responsible for the following duties:

(i) 

(ii) 

(iii) 

(iv) 

(v) 

(vi) 

Receive funds from all sources for which the Pawnee 
Business Council is held accountable, and maintain 
financial records which shall reflect actual receipts and 
disbursements of all funds and which shall reflect the 
financial position of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

Deposit funds from any and all sources for which the 
Pawnee Business Council is held accountable in an insured 
bank or other approved financial institution.

Disburse by check, the funds from any and all sources as 
decided by the Pawnee Business Council. All checks shall 
be signed by the Treasurer and countersigned by the 
President.

An annual independent audit of all funds for which the 
Pawnee Business Council is held accountable.

Present financial status reports and budget reports as 
determined by the Pawnee Business Council.

Perform the duties of the Secretary, in the absence of the 
Secretary.

(vii)  The Treasurer shall be bonded.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. Vacancies - In the event of Presidential vacancy, the Vice-President shall 
immediately succeed to the office of President. All other vacancies shall 

be filled by the President giving priority to the pool of candidates from the 
previous election, subject to the approval of the Pawnee Business Council, 
provided, that such appointment shall be effective unless formally 
disapproved by the Pawnee Business Council within thirty (30) days after 
appointment.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - FORFEITURE, RECALL, REMOVAL

 
 Section 1. Forfeiture - If a member of the Pawnee Business Council fails or refuses 
to attend two (2) regular or special meetings per year from the date of oath 
of office, unless excused by the Pawnee Business Council President for 
illness or other causes for which the member cannot be held responsible, 
his/her office shall be declared forfeited by a resolution of the Pawnee 
Business Council and the vacancy shall be filled.

Section 2. Recall - Upon receipt of a petition signed by fifty per cent (50%) of the 
number of voters who voted in the last regular election calling for the recall 
of any member of the Pawnee Business Council, it shall be the duty of the 
election commission to call and conduct within thirty (30) days an election 
on such recall. Recall shall be effective only if a majority of those voting 
shall vote in favor of such recall and that at least fifty per cent (50%) + one 
(1) of the number voting in the previous election vote in the recall election. 
Once a member has faced a recall attempt, no further recall action shall be 
brought against that member until at least twelve (12) months have passed. 
No member of the Pawnee Business Council shall be subject to recall 
action within the first six (6) months of that member's term.

Section 3. Removal of Pawnee Business Council Members. - The Nasharo Council 
shall investigate complaints of misconduct in office of members of the 
Pawnee Business Council and upon a proper showing shall call a joint 
meeting of the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council to act 
upon such complaints. Such joint Council shall have the power, by a 
majority vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove the accused 
from office; provided, a quorum from each of the Councils is present.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - NASHARO COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. The Nasharo Council shall consist of eight (8) members with a quorum of 
five (5) to transact business. Each band shall have two (2) representatives 
on the Nasharo Council selected by the members of the tribal bands, Chaui, 
Kitkehahki, Pitahawirata and Skidi. The Nasharo Council shall have the

right to review all acts of the Pawnee Business Council regarding Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma membership and Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma claims 
or rights growing out of treaties between the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma 
and the United States, provided:

(i) 

Such acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be valid 
and effective unless formally disapproved by the Nasharo 
Council within thirty (30) days after such acts are referred 
to the latter Council;

(ii)  Where such acts are disapproved by the Nasharo Council, 
the Pawnee Business Council may submit them to a 
referendum of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and they 
shall be valid and effective if approved by a majority vote 
of the adult members voting in person or by absentee 
ballot; provided, that, at least fifty (50) of those qualified to 
vote shall cast ballots in such election.

Section 2. The Bands of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall select their respective 
representative under rules and regulations prescribed by the Chiefs of each 
Band. The representatives selected shall serve until the next regular 
selection of members of the Nasharo Council.

Section 3. Vacancies in the membership of the Nasharo Council shall be filled under 

rules and regulations prescribed by the Nasharo Council.

Section 4. The Nasharo Council shall have the power to establish its own offices and 
to designate its own officers, to fix its own meeting days, and to adopt its 
own rules of procedure; provided a quorum is present to transact business. 
Records of the proceedings of this body shall be kept.

Section 5. All members of the Nasharo Council shall attend tribal constitution 

orientation classes as prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Pawnee Nation shall enjoy without hindrance freedom 
of worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, and association.

Section 2. This Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize 
the rights and privileges of the members of the Pawnee Nation as citizens 

of the State of Oklahoma or of the United States. The Indian Civil Rights 
Act of 1968 (ICRA) and rights guaranteed under this Act is applicable to 
the tribal members and other persons within tribal jurisdiction.

Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Pawnee Nation shall 
not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this 
Constitution and By-Laws without the consent of such individual member.
 
 

ARTICLE X - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the Pawnee 
Business Council or by a petition signed by at least fifty (50) of the adult members of 
the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the 
Pawnee Nation voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior and conducted pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma. Provided, that, at least fifty (50) of those qualified to vote shall cast ballots 
in such election. The amendment shall become effective when approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior, so long as such approval is required by Federal law, and 
ratified by the adult members of the Nation.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - PLACE OF MEETINGS

 
 Unless some other location in the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma jurisdiction is 
designated in the notice, all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and of the 
Nasharo Council shall be held at the Pawnee Nation Reserve at Pawnee, Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution when approved by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted 
to a referendum vote of the adult members of the Nation, and shall become effective 
if approved by a two-thirds vote of the adult members voting in person, provided that 
at least fify votes are cast.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All enactments of the Nation adopted before the effective date of this Constitution shall 
continue in effect to the extent that they are not inconsistent with this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any part of this Constitution is held by the Federal Court to be invalid or contrary to 
the U.S. Constitution or Federal law, the remainder shall continue to be in full force 
and effect.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 Nancy Jemison, Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue
 
 
I, 
 
 of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Oklahoma Indian 
Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967) and delegated to me by Secretarial Order 
No. 3150 as extended by Secretarial Order No. 3177, as amended, do hereby approve 
the Constitution of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. This Constitution is effective on 
the date ratified by the adult members of the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma; PROVIDED, 
that nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this 
document that would be contrary to Federal law.

LWu

ACTING Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.

Date: APR 27 1998
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs on April 27, 1998, the foregoing Constitution of the Pawnee Nation
of Oklahoma was submitted to the qualified voters of the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma 
and on July 4, 1998, was duly ratified by a vote of 48 
for, and 18 against, and 0 cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated, 
in an election in which at least two/thirds (2/3) of the members qualified to vote cast 
their ballots in accordance with Article VIII of the Constitution and By-laws of the 
Pawnee Indians of Oklahoma.

Chairman, Election Board

Election Board Member

Date: July 4, 1998

Election Board Member
 
 

UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 
OFFICE OF THE SOLICITOR 
 
 WASHINGTON. D.C. 20240

NOV 25 1980

Memorandum

To: 

From: 

Assistant Secretary—Indian Affairs

Associate Solicitor, Division of Indian Affairs

Subject: 

Jurisdictional status of the Pawnee Tribal Reserve

This responds to your memorandum requesting an opinion from this office 
as to whether the Pawnee Tribal Reserve, also known as the Pawnee school 
and agency reserve, constitutes an Indian reservation within the meaning 
of 18 U.S.C. 1151(a).1/

The Pawnee Tribal Reserve, comprising some 646 acres, is located within the 
original boundaries of the former Pawnee Indian Reservation. In 1968, this 
tract of land plus four 10-acre cemetery sites were set aside from the public 
domain by Congress and "declared to be held in trust by the United States 
for the benefit of the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma." Act of October 2, 1968, 
82 Stat. 935.

The relevant history of the Reserve begins with the Cession Agreement of 
November 2, 1892, between the so-called Jerome Commission and the Pawnee 
Tribe providing for the allotment of the Pawnee Reservation in Oklahoma 
and the sale of all surplus lands to the United States. I. Kappler, 
Indian Affairs, Laws and Treaties 496 (2nd ed- 1904). Article II of the 
Agreement reserved from allotment "land now being used for church or 
educational purposes, or for public use by the United States. ..." 
The Act of March 3, 1893, C. 208, 27 Stat. 612, 644, ratified the Agreement 
and appropriated $80,000 as partial payment for the surplus lands. The 
residue of the proceeds from the sale of the surplus lands were to be 
credited to the Pawnee Tribe.

Upon approval of the schedule of allotments to the members of the Pawnee 
Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior, 800 acres of land were formally 
reserved for school and agency purposes in addition to four 10-acre 
cemetery sites. Senate Report No. 831, 90th Gong., 1st Sess. 4 (Letter 
of Assistant Secretary of the Interior, September 11, 1967).

1/ 18 U.S.C. 1151(a) includes within Indian country "all land within the 
limits of an Indian reservation under the jurisdiction of the United States 
Government notwithstanding the issuance of any patent." If the Reserve is 
"Indian country", the United States has exclusive criminal jurisdiction. 
Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes of Oklahoma, 618 F.2d 665 (10th Cir. 1980); 
C.M.G. v. Oklahoma, Ok. Cr. 594 P.2d 798 (1979); State v. Littlechief, 
Ok. Cr., 573 P.2d 263 (1978).

In 1913, pursuant to a special jurisdictional act, the Pawnee Tribe 
filed a petition in the Court of Claims seeking, inter alia, compensation 
for the value of the surplus lands remaining after allotment. The Court, 
in Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma v. United States, 56 Ct. CL. 1, 13 (1920), 
determined that the Tribe was entitled to compensation for the surplus 
acres, but excluded the land reserved for school and agency purposes, 
reasoning that the Reserve "continues as tribal property."

With the passage of the Indian Claims Commission Act of 1946, 25 U.S.C. 570 
et seq., the Pawnee Tribe sought compensation for the failure of the United 
States to fulfill various treaty and statutory obligations including payment 
for the value of two tracts of land within the Reserve conveyed by the United 
States to the City of Pawnee and the Home Mission Board of the Southern 
Baptist Convention.2/ The Indian Claims Commission, in an opinion dated 
July 14, 1950 (Docket No. 10), disagreed with the 1920 Court of Claims’ con
clusion that the reserved lands were tribal property and held that title 
to the Reserve had passed to the United States upon congressional ratifica
tion of the 1892 Cession Agreement. The Commission concluded that reserving 
those lands for school and agency purposes did not revert title to the 
Tribe, but merely withdrew them from settlement and sale. Thus, the 
Pawnee Tribe was entitled to payment for the reserved lands conveyed to the 
City of Pawnee and the Home Mission Board at the Cession Agreement rate of 
$1.25 per acre and not the land’s fair market value at the time of convey
ance. The Indian Claims Commission’s decision was upheld by the Court of 
Claims in Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma v. United States, 109 F. Supp. 860 
(1953). The Pawnees were never paid for the remainder of the reserved lands. 
House Report No. 747, 90th Cong., 1st Sess. 6 (Letter of Assistant Secretary 
of the Interior, August 24, 1967); Senate Report No. 831, supra, at 7 
(Letter of Assistant Secretary of the Interior, September 11, 1967).

When the Reserve was no longer needed for school or agency purposes during 
the 1960’s, the Bureau of Indian Affairs issued a year-to-year revocable 
permit to the Pawnee Tribe to use the Reserve lands pursuant to a plan of 
operations prepared by the Tribe. However, tribal efforts to attract 
industry and obtain funds for the construction of tribal housing units 
proved unsuccessful because the Tribe lacked title to the Reserve. Develop
ment was simply not feasible under a yearly permit.

It was the purpose of H.R. 5910 and S. 1171 to establish tribal ownership 
pf the Reserve in order to facilitate on-going and future tribal uses of

2/ Act of March 1, 1907, C. 2285, 35 Stat. 1015, 1044 (Congress authorized
the sale of 88.43 acres of the reserved lands to the City of Pawnee, Oklahoma); 
Act of March 3, 1909, 35 Stat. 781, 814 (25 acres conveyed to the Home 
Mission Board of the Southern Baptist Convention).

the land.3/ House Report No. 747, supra, at 2; Senate Report No. 831, 
supra, at 2.

As introduced, both bills provided that the Reserve lands were to be held 
in trust by the United States for the Pawnee Tribe. However, at the recom
mendation of the Bureau of the Budget, the Senate amended H.R. 5910 by 
providing for an outright conveyance to the Tribe, rather than declaring 
the Reserve to be held in trust for the benefit of the Tribe. In conference 
on the conflicting provisions, the Senate receded from its amendment con
veying the Reserve in fee and the conferees agreed that the land be held 
in trust for the Pawnee Tribe,

[i]nasmuch as the lands were formally a part of the 
Pawnee Reservation, and other lands allotted to 
individual Indians within the reservation area are 
still held by the United States in trust for the 
allottees ....

House Report No. 1894, 90th Cong., 2nd Sess. (1968) (Committee of 
Conference).

Senator Harris of Oklahoma, a sponsor of S. 1171, elaborated on the actions 
of the conferees in his submission of the Conference Report to the Senate;

Moreover but for a legal technicality, these excess 
school lands, which the tribe has not been compensated 
for, would now be held in trust for the tribe and this 
legislation would not be necessary.

Since 1874, the tribe has continually used these lands and 
except for the portions conveyed, the tribe has always 
regarded the land as its property.

When the United States needed lands from the tribal 
estate for administrative or school purposes, it reserved 
the land, and when the land was no longer needed, the 
Secretary of the Interior restored the land back to tribal
jurisdiction in trust. Except for the conflicting court

3/ Even after the ratification of the 1892 Cession Agreement, all tribal 
activities and social functions continued to take place at the community 
center located on the Reserve. Today, the Tribe maintains on the Reserve 
its administrative offices, community buildings, ceremonial and recreational 
facilities and 10 tribally-owned housing units.
 
 

 
 
 opinions this land would have been restored to the Pawnees 
in trust. It seems unfair and unjust to force a fee title 
on the Pawnees . . . .

114 Cong. Record 27505 (September 18, 1968).

The fact that the Congress did not declare the lands of the Reserve a 
reservation in the Act of October 2, 1968, does not mandate the conclusion 
that the Reserve does not constitute a reservation. There is no particular 
form of words necessary to create a reservation. As stated years ago by 
the Supreme Court:

[I]n order to create a reservation, it is not necessary 
that there be a formal cession or a formal act setting 
apart a particular tract. It is enough that from what 
has been done there results a certain defined tract 
appropriate to certain purposes.

Minnesota v. Hitchcock, 185 U.S. 373, 390 (1902); accord, Sac and Fox Tribe 
of Mississippi In Iowa v. Licklider, 576 F.2d 145 (1978), cert denied, 
99 S. Ct. 353 (1978).

Recently, the Supreme Court in United States v. John, 437 U.S. 634 (1978), 
found certain land set apart by statute for the use of Choctaw Indians 
to be a reservation. At issue in John was the application of the Major 
Crimes Act, 18 U.S.C. 1153, which depended on whether certain lands 
held in trust for Choctaw Indians of Mississippi were "Indian country" 
within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. 1151(a).

Congress had, by the Act of June 21, 1939, C. 235, 53 Stat. 851, declared 
that title to all lands previously purchased for the Mississippi Choctaws 
were to be "in the United States in trust for such Choctaw Indians of 
one-half or more Indian blood, resident in Mississippi as shall be designated 
by the Secretary of the Interior."4/ In 1944, the Assistant Secretary of 
the Interior, pursuant to section 7 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
1934, 48 Stat. 987, 25 U.S.C. 5476, proclaimed the Mississippi Choctaw 
lands to be a reservation. The Court in John held that the lands constituted 
a reservation under 18 U.S.C. 51151(a) and indicated that this would be the 
case whether or not a formal proclamation had been issued. The Court 
stated:

The principal test applied was drawn from an earlier case, 
United States v. Pelican, 232 U.S. 442, 58 L. Ed. 676, 34 
S. Ct. 396 (1914), and was whether the land in question

4/ Like the Act of October 2, 1968, the 1939 Act did not expressly declare 
the trust lands to be a reservation.

"had been validly set apart for the use of the Indians 
as such, under the superintendence of the government." 
[Citations omitted]

The Mississippi lands in question here were declared by 
Congress to be held in trust by the Federal Government 
for the benefit of the Mississippi Choctaw Indians who 
were at that time under federal supervision. There is 
no apparent reason why these lands, which had been 
purchased in previous years for the aid of these Indians, 
did not become a "reservation" at least for the purposes 
of federal criminal jurisdiction at that particular time.

United States v. John, supra, 437 U.S. at 649.

Most recently, the Court of Appeals in Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes v. Oklahoma, 
618 F.2d 665 (10th Cir. 1980) was asked to determine whether certain lands 
held in trust for the Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes constitute Indian country 
within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. 51151(a). Like the Pawnees, the Cheyenne - 
Arapahos had entered into a Cession Agreement with the Jerome Commission 
providing for the allotment of their reservation and the sale of all surplus 
lands to the United States. Congress subsequently enacted a series of special 
statutes declaring certain lands 5/ to be held in trust for the Tribes. 
618 F. 2d at 667. The Court of Appeals, relying on John, concluded that 
all lands held in trust for the Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes pursuant to acts 
of Congress are Indian country within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. 51151(a).

The Pawnee Tribal Reserve clearly meets the reservation test affirmed by 
the Supreme Court in John and followed by the Tenth Circuit Court of Appeals 
in Cheyenne - Arapaho Tribes. The Pawnees are under the superintendence 
of the Federal Government and by special statute Congress has declared 
title to the Reserve to be held in trust for the benefit of the Pawnee 
Tribe.

Accordingly, we conclude that the Ihwnee Tribal Reserve constitutes a 
reservation within the meaning of 18 U.S.C. 51151(a).

Hans Walker, Jr.

5/ Most of the land was former school or agency reserves within the 
original boundaries of the reservation. Act of April 13, 1938, 52 Stat. 
213; Act of January 19, 1942, 56 Stat. 21; Act of August 10, 1946, 60 Stat. 
976.
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT 
CORPORATE CHARTER 
 
 of the 
 
PAWNEE INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT I

 
 Sections 5 and 6 of the Corporate Charter shall be amended to read 
as follows:

Sec. 5. Following the ratification of this Amendment and until 
such time as the Secretary's power of approval is terminated 
pursuant to Section 6, the following corporate acts or transactions 
shall be valid only after approval by the Secretary of the Interior 
or his duly authorized representative:

(a)  Any contract involving a payment by the tribe of more than 
a total sum of $3,000 or of more than $1,200 in any one year.

(b)  Any transaction by which the tribe borrows money where such 
borrowing brings the total indebtedness of the tribe, aside from 
loans from the Indian Credit Fund, to a figure in excess of $1,000.

(c)  Any resolution or ordinance governing the making of land 
assignments to members of the tribe, the acquisition of land from 
members of the tribe, or the use of tribal land by individuals.

(d)  Any lease, grazing permit, or other contract affecting tribal 
land, tribal minerals, or other tribal interest in land.

(e)  Any per capita distribution of corporate income to members 
of the tribe in excess of $200 in any one year.

Sec. 6. At any time after the ratification of this Amendment, 
any power of approval established by Section 5 of the Charter 
may be terminated by the Secretary of the Interior after consul
tation with the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council. 
Following such consultation, if the Secretary shall deem it 
advisable to terminate such power, he shall give notice at least 
six months prior to the time he intends such termination to 
become effective in order to afford the Pawnee Indian Tribe of 
Oklahoma an opportunity to present its views as to why such power 
should not be terminated. Not less than 45 days prior to the 
time specified by the Secretary in his notice of termination, the 
Pawnee Business Council may by a majority vote of its membership, 
and shall, if it has received a petition signed by at least fifty 
members of the Pawnee Tribe, submit the question upon not less 
than 15 days' nor more than 30 days’ notice to a tribal referendum 
to be conducted under rules prescribed by the business council. 
The results of such referendum shall be forwarded to the Secretary 
for consideration in making his final decision within 10 days after 
the referendum has been held and the results ascertained.

At any time after the ratification of this amendment, upon 
request by the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council, 
or by petition signed by at least 30 percent of the eligible 
voters of the tribe, any power of approval reserved to the 
Secretary in Section 5 may be terminated. If the Secretary 
shall disapprove the request or fail to approve or disapprove 
it within 90 days after its receipt, the Pawnee Business Council 
shall thereupon submit the question of such termination to the 
tribe by referendum. The termination shall be effective if 
approved by a majority vote, provided at least 30 percent of 
those entitled to vote shall vote in such election.

The foregoing Amendment I to the Corporate Charter, having been approved 
by me, is herewith submitted for ratification by the adult members of 
the Pawnee Tribe of Indians, Oklahoma, in accordance with Section 8 of 
the Corporate Charter and pursuant to the authority vested in me by the 
Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

Approval recommended;

D. S. MYER

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: April 6, 1951

OSCAR L. CHAPMAN 
Secretary of the Interior 
 
 

(SEAL)

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved April 6, 1951, by Oscar L. Chapman, 

Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment I to the Corporate 

Charter of the Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma, was submitted for 

ratification to the adult members of the Pawnee Tribe, and on July 10, 

1951, was ratified by a vote of 54 for and 2 against, in an election 

in which at least 50 votes were cast in accordance with Section 8 of 

the Charter and Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of

June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

Benjamin White
Chairman, Pawnee Business Council

Phillip Jim
Chairman, Pawnee Nasharo Council

H. E. Hyden
Acting Area Director, Anadarko Area Office
 
  
  
 

AMENDMENT
CORPORATE CHARTER 

 
 of the 
 
PAWNEE INDIAN TRIBE OF OKLAHOMA

AMENDMENT II

 
 Section 4, Limitations of Corporate Powers, subsection (b) shall 

be amended to read as follows:

”(b) No tribal land or interest in land shall be leased 

   for a longer period than authorized by law."
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, Harrison Loesch, Assistant Secretary of the Interior

of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 

to me by the Act of June 29, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve 

the foregoing Amendment II to the Corporate Charter of the Pawnee 

Iridian Tribe of Oklahoma.

Approval recommended:

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Assistant

Secretary of the Interior 
 
  
  
 
(SEAL)

 
 Washington, D. C.

Date: APR 7 1971 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved April 7, 1971, by the

Commissioner of Indian Affairs, the attached

Amendment II to the Corporate Charter of the Pawnee Indians of 

Oklahoma was submitted for ratification to the adult members of 

the Pawnee Tribe of Indians, and in accordance with Section 8 

of the Corporate Charter and Section 3 of the Act of June 26, 

1936 (49 Stat. 1967), was on May 1, 1971, duly

ratified by a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the 190 voters who 

cast ballots in an election in which 153 voted for and 

37 voted against.

Chairman, Election Board

Deputy Area Director

