 
 ./- 

rOJjr 

1 - 

• U^>6::-:  >,  •  
 

UNITED  STATES 
UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT  OF  THE  INTERIOR 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE  OF  INDIAN  AFFAIRS 
OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 


 
 + 
+  
 

CONSTITUTION  AND  BY-LAWS  OF  THE 
CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 
PAWNEE  INDIANS  OF 

 
  
 PAWNEE INDIANS OF  .  
 
OKLAHOMA 
OKLAHOMA 

 
 + 
+ 

RATIFIED  JANUARY  6,  1938 
RATIFIED JANUARY 6,  1938 

• • 
 
 

UNITED  STATES 
UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT  PRINTING  OFFICE 
GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1938 
WASHINGTON: 1938 

/ 

L42. VI, 
 
  
  
  
  
 

, 

I 

 
 ;fly. 4., • ,,,,  
 

I 
 
 1  
 

LIBRARY  OF CONGRESS 
LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 

 
 MAY 2  1938 
MAY 2 1938 

OtVISION  OF  DOCUMENTS 
DIVISION Of DOCUMENTS  ‘ 


CONSTITUTION  AND  BY-LAWS  OF  THE  PAWNEE 
CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE PAWNEE 
INDIANS  OF  OKLAHOMA 
INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA 

PREAMBLE 
PREAMBLE 


We,  the  members  of  the  four  confederated  bands  of  Indians,  name 
We, the members of the four confederated bands of Indians, name-
ly, Chaui, Kitkehahke,  Petahauerat  and  Skedee, which  now  constitute 
ly, Chaui, Kitkehahke, Petahauerat and Skedee, which now constitute 
the  Pawnee  Indians  of  Oklahoma,  with  faith  in  the  purposes  of  our 
the Pawnee Indians of Oklahoma, with faith in the purposes of our 
Supreme  Being,  with  abounding  pride  in  our  racial  heritages  and 
Supreme Being, with abounding pride in  our racial  heritages  and 
with  the  determination  to  promote  through  marshalled  efforts  our 
with the determination to  promote through marshalled efforts  our 
social,  economic  and  political  advancement,  do  solemnly  ordain  and 
social, economic and political advancement, do solemnly ordain and 
establish  this  organization  and  adopt  this  Constitution  and  By-laws 
establish this organization and adopt this Constitution and By-laws 
pursuant  to  the  Oklahoma  Indian  Welfare  Act  of  June  26,  1936 
pursuant to  the  Oklahoma Indian  Welfare Act  of  June 26,  1936 
(49 Stat.  1967). 
(49 Stat. 1967). 

ARTICLE I— NAME 
ARTICLE  I — N A M E 

The  name  of  this  organization  shall  be  the  "Pawnee  Indian  Tribe 
The name of this organization shall be the "Pawnee Indian Tribe 

of  Oklahoma." 
of Oklahoma." 

ARTICLE II— PuRrosz 
ARTICLE  II—PURPOSE 

The  purposes  of  this  organization  shall  be: 
The purposes of this organization shall be: 
(a)  To  define,  establish  and  safeguard 
the  rights,  powers  and 
(a)  To define,  establish  and  safeguard  the  rights,  powers  and 

privileges  of  the  Tribe  and  its  members; 
privileges of the Tribe and its members; 

(b)  To secure for the Tribe and its  members the rights,  powers, 
(J)  To  secure  for  the  Tribe  and  its  members  the  rights,  powers, 
privileges  and  benefits  available  under 
the 
privileges  and  benefits  available  under  the  provisions  of  the 
Oklahoma  Indian  Welfare  Act; 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act; 

the  provisions  of 

(<?)  To  promote  in  other  ways  the  common  welfare  of  the  Tribe 
(c)  To promote in  other ways the common welfare of the Tribe 

and  its  membership. 
and its membership. 

ARTICLE III— MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE 
ARTICLE  III—MEMBERSHIP  OF  TRIBE 

SECTION  1.  The  membership  of  the  Pawnee  Indian  Tribe  of  Okla 
SECTION 1.  The membership of the Pawnee Indian Tribe of Okla-

homa  shall  consist  of  the  following  persons : 
homa shall consist of the following persons: 

(a)  All  persons  enrolled  or  entitled  to  be  enrolled  on  the  official 
(a)  All persons enrolled or entitled to be enrolled on the official 

annuity  roll  of  the  Tribe  as  of  February  19, 1937; 
annuity roll of the Tribe as of February 19, 1937; 

(Z>)  All  children  born  since  the  date  of  said  roll  of  a  lawful  mar 
(b)  All children born since the date of said roll of a lawful mar-

riage, both  of  whose parents  are  members  of  the  Tribe; 
riage, both of whose parents are members of the Tribe; 

SBO. 2.  The  Pawnee  Business  Council  shall  have  power  to  prescribe 
SEC. 2.  The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to prescribe 
rules  and  regulations  covering  future  membership  of  the  Tribe, 
rules  and  regulations  covering  future  membership  of  the  Tribe, 
including  the  adoption  and  loss  of  membership,  provided: 
including the adoption and loss of membership, provided: 

(a)  That  such rules  and  regulations  shall be subject  to  the  approval 
(a)  That such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval 

of  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior; 
of the Secretary of the Interior; 

proval  of  the  Nasharo  Council; 
proval of the Nasharo Council; 

(b)  That  such  rules  and  regulations  shall  be  subject  to  the  ap 
(b)  That such rules  and regulations  shall  be subject  to  the  ap-

(c)  That,  after  one  year  from  the  adoption  of  this  Constitution, 
(c)  That, after one year from the adoption of this  Constitution, 
no  person  shall  be  admitted  to  membership  who  is  of  less  than  one-
no person shall be admitted to membership who is  of less than one-
fourth  degree  Pawnee  Indian  blood. 
fourth degree Pawnee Indian blood. 
( 1 ) 
(1 ) 

46074—38 
46074-38 

2 
2 

ARTICLE IV— PAWNEE BUSINESS COUNCIL 
ARTICLE  I V — P A W N E E  BUSINESS  COUNCIL 

SECTION  1.  The  supreme  governing  body  of  the  Tribe  shall  be  the 
SECTION 1.  The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be the 

Pawnee  Business  Council,  which  shall  consist  of  eight  members. 
Pawnee Business  Council,  which shall  consist of  eight members. 

SEC.  2.  The  Pawnee  Business  Council  shall  have  power  to  appoint 
SEC. 2.  The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to appoint 
subordinate  officers,  committees  and  representatives,  to  transact  Dusi-
subordinate officers, committees and representatives, to transact busi-
ness  and  otherwise  speak  or  act  oh  behalf  of  the  Tribe  in  all  matters 
ness and otherwise speak or act on behalf of the Tribe in all matters 
on  which  the  Tribe  is  empowered  to  act,  provided: 
on which the Tribe is empowered to  act,  provided: 

(a)  That  the  powers  of  the  Tribe  shall  be  set  forth  in  detail  in  a 
(a)  That the powers of the Tribe shall be set  forth in detail in a 

Federal  Charter  to  be  requested  by  the  Pawnee  Business  Council; 
Federal Charter to be requested by the Pawnee Business Council; 

(6)  That  acts  of  the  Pawnee, Business  Council  shall  be  subject  to 
(b)  That acts of the Pawnee. Business Council shall be subject to 
review  of  the  Nasharo  Council  in accordance  with  Section  2 of  Article 
review of the Nasharo Council in accordance with Section 2 of Article 
V  of  this  Constitution. 
V of this Constitution. 

SEC.  3.  The  present  Pawnee  Business  Council  shall  serve  till  the 
SEC.  3.  The present Pawnee Business Council shall  serve till  the 
next  regular  election  provided  for  in  Section  4  of  this  Article,  or 
next regular election  provided for in  Section 4 of this Article,  or 
until  their  successors  are  elected  and  installed,  provided; 
until their successors are elected and installed, provided: 

(a)  That  within  thirty  days  after  the  adoption  of  this  Constitu 
(a)  That within thirty days after the  adoption of this  Constitu-
tion,  the  said  Council  shall  organize  for  business  by  selecting  from 
tion,  the said Council shall organize for business by selecting from 
among  its  own  membership  a  President,  Vice-President,  and  a  Secre 
among its own membership a President, Vice-President, and a Secre-
tary-Treasurer,  who  shall  serve  in  these  respective  offices  at  the  will 
tary-Treasurer, who shall serve in these respective offices  at the will 
of  this  Council. 
of this Council. 

SEC. 4.  Kegular  elections of  members  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Coun 
SEc. 4.  Regular elections of members of the Pawnee Business Coun-
cil  shall  be  held  on  the  first  Saturday  in  May,  1939,  and  on  the  first 
cil shall be held on the first  Saturday in May, 1939, and on the first 
Saturday  in  May  of  each  second  year  thereafter,  provided: 
Saturday in May of each second year thereafter, provided: 

(a)  That  such  elections  shall  be  held  under  rules  and  regulations 
(a)  That such elections shall be held under rules and regulations 

prescribed  by  the  Pawnee  Business  Council; 
prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council; 

(&)  That  all  members  of  the  Pawnee  Indian  Tribe,  twenty-one 
(b)  That  all  members of  the  Pawnee Indian  Tribe,  twenty-one 

years  of  age  and  older, shall  be  eligible  to  vote  in  these  elections; 
years of age and older, shall be eligible to vote in these elections; 

(c)  That  any  person,  in  order  to  be  eligible  for  election  to  mem 
(c)  That any person ' in order to be eligible for election to mem-
bership  on  the  Pawnee  Business  Council,  must  be  a  male  member  of 
bership on the Pawnee Business Council, must be a male member of 
the  Pawnee  Indian  Tribe,  twenty-five  years  of  age  or  older,  and  a 
the Pawnee Indian Tribe, twenty-five years of age or older,  and a 
resident  of 
the  territory  known  as  the  original  Pawnee  Indian 
resident  of  the  territory  known  as  the  original  Pawnee  Indian 
Reservation  in  Oklahoma; 
Reservation in Oklahoma; 

(d)  That  a  member  of  the  Nasharo  Council  shall  not be eligible  for 
(d)  That a member of the Nasharo Council shall not be eligible for 

election  to  the  Pawnee  Business  Council; 
election to the Pawnee Business Council; 

(e)  That  members  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  elected  pur 
(e)  That members of  the  Pawnee Business Council elected  pur-
suant  to  the  provisions  of  this  section  shall  be  installed  immediately 
suant to the provisions of this section shall be installed immediately 
after  their  election  and  the  respective  councils  shall  then  organize  for 
after their election and the respective councils shall then organize for 
business by  selecting  from  among  their  own  membership  a  President, 
business by selecting from among their own membership a President, 
Vice-President  and  Secretary-Treasurer  who  shall  serve at  the  will  of 
Vice-President and Secretary-Treasurer who shall serve at the will of 
the  respective  councils. 
the respective councils. 

SEC. 5.  All  acts of  the Pawnee  Business  Council  shall  be  determined 
SEC. 5.  All acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be determined 
by  a  majority  vote  of  the  membership  present,  provided  that  five 
by a majority vote  of the membership  present,  provided that  five 
members  of 
transact 
the  Council  shall  constitute  a  quorum 
members  of  the  Council  shall  constitute  a quorum  to  transact 
business. 
business. 

to 

SEC.  6.  Regular  meetings  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  shall  be 
SEC. 6.  Regular meetings of the Pawnee Business Council shall  be 
held  on  the  first  Saturday  in  February,  May,  August,  and  November 
held on the first  Saturday in February, May, August, and November 
of  each  year,  provided: 
of each year, provided: 

(a)  That  special  meetings  may  be  called  by  the  President  at  his 
(a)  That special  meetings may be called  by the President at his 
discretion  and  shall  be called  by  him  upon  the  written  request  of  five 
discretion and shall be called by him upon the written request of five 
members  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council. 
members of the Pawnee Business Council. 

SEC. 7.  Vacancies  in  the  membership  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Coun 
SEC. 7.  Vacancies in the membership of the Pawnee Business Coun-
cil  shall  be  filled  for  an  unexpired  term  through  appointment  by  the 
cil shall be filled for an unexpired term through appointment by the 
President,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Council. 
President, subject to the approval of the Council. 

3 
3 

ARTICLE V— NASFIARO COUNCIL 
ARTICLE  V—NASHARO  COUNCIL 

SECTION  1.  The  Nasharo  Council  shall  consist  of  eight  members 
SECTION  1.  The Nasharo  Council  shall  consist  of  eight  members 
selected  from  the chieftainships  of  the  following  tribal  bands:  Chaui, 
selected from the chieftainships of the following tribal bands:  Chaui, 
Kitkehahke, Petahauerat  and  Skedee,  provided: 
Eitkehahke, Petahauerat and Skedee, provided: 

(a)  That  each band  shall  have  two  representatives  on  the  Nasharo 
(a)  That each band shall have two representatives on the Nasharo 

Council. 
Council. 

SEC  2.  The  Nasharo  Council  shall  have  the  right  to  review  all 
SEC.  2.  The Nasharo Council  shall  have the right to review  all 
acts  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  regarding  tribal  membership 
acts of the Pawnee Business Council regarding tribal  membership 
and  tribal  claims or  rights  growing  out  of  treaties  between  the  Tribe 
and tribal claims or rights growing out of treaties between the Tribe 
and  the  United  States,  provided : 
and the United States, provided: 

(a)  That  such  acts  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  shall  be  valid 
(a)  That such acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be valid 
and.  effective  unless  formally  disapproved  by  the  Nasharo  Council 
and effective unless formally  disapproved by the Nasharo Council 
within  thirty  days  after  such  acts  are  referred  to  the  latter  Council. 
within thirty days after such acts are referred to the latter Council. 
(5)  That  where  sych  acts are  disapproved  by  the  Nasharo  Council, 
(b)  That where such acts are disapproved by the Nasharo Council, 
the  Pawnee  Business  Council  may  submit  them  to  a  referendum  of 
the Pawnee Business Council may submit them to  a referendum of 
the  Tribe "and  they  shall  be  valid  and  effective  if  approved  by  a  ma 
the Tribe'and they shall be valid and effective if approved by a ma-
jority  vote  of  the  adult  members  voting  in  person,  provided  that  at 
jority vote of the adult members voting in person, provided that at 
least  50  votes  are  cast. 
least 50 votes are cast. 

SEC.  3.  Within  thirty  days  after  the  adoption  of  this  Constitution, 
SEC.  3.  Within thirty days after the adoption of this Constitution, 
the  tribal  bands, referred  to  in  Section  1 of  this  Article,  shall  select 
the tribal bands, referred to in Section 1 of this Article, shall select 
their  respective  representatives under  rules and  regulations  prescribed 
their respective representatives under rules and regulations prescribed 
by  the  respective  band  chiefs,  subject  to  the  approval  of  the  Super 
by the respective band chiefs, subject to the approval of the Super-
intendent  of  the  Pawnee  Indian  Agency,  provided: 
intendent of the Pawnee Indian Agency, provided: 

(a)  That  the  representatives  so  selected  shall  serve  till  the  next 
(a)  That the representatives so  selected  shall  serve till  the  next 
regular  selection  of  members  of  the  Nasharo  Council  as  provided  for 
regular selection of members of the Nasharo Council as provided for 
in  Section  4 of  this  Article,  or  until  their  successors  are  selected. 
in Section 4 of this Article, or until their successors are selected. 

SEC. 4.  Regular  selections  of  members  of  the  Nasharo  Council  shall 
SEC. 4.  Regular selections of members of the Nasharo Council shall 
be made  on  the  first  Saturday  in  May  1941, and  on the  first  Saturday 
be made on the first Saturday in May 1941, and on the first Saturday 
in  May  of  each  fourth  year  thereafter,  provided: 
in May of each fourth year thereafter, provided: 

(a)  That  such selections  shall be made  under  rules  and  regulations 
(a)  That such selections shall be made under rules and regulations 

prescribed  by  the  Nasharo  Council. 
prescribed by the Nasharo Council. 

SEC.  5.  Any  person  selected  to  membership  on  the  Nasharo  Council 
SEC. 5.  Any person selected to membership on the Nasharo Council 
shall  be  a  member  of  the  band  which  he  represents  and  shall  not  be 
shall be a member of the band which he represents and shall not be 
a member  of  the  Pawnee Business  Council. 
a member of the Pawnee Business Council. 

SEC.  6.  Vacancies  in  the  membership  of  this  Council  shall  be  filled 
SEC.  6.  Vacancies in the membership of this Council shall be filled 
for  an  unexpired  term  in  the  same  manner  in  which  the  preceding 
for an unexpired term in the same manner in which the preceding 
representative  had  been  selected. 
representative had been selected. 

SEC.  7.  The  Nasharo  Council  shall  have  the  power  to  establish  its 
SEC.  7.  The Nasharo Council shall have the power to establish its 
own  offices  and  to  designate  its  own  officers,  to  fix  its  own  meeting 
own offices  and to  designate its  own officers, to fix  its own meeting 
days  and  to  adopt  its  own  rules  of  procedure,  provided  that  five 
days and to  adopt its  own rules  of procedure, provided that  five 
members  shall  constitute  a  quorum  to  transact  business.  Records  of 
members shall constitute a quorum to transact business.  Records of 
the  proceedings  of  this  body  shall  be  kept  and  a  copy  forwarded  to 
the proceedings of this body shall be kept and a copy forwarded to 
the  Superintendent  of  the  Reservation. 
the Superintendent of the Reservation. 

ARTICLE VI— REMOVAL OF PAWNER BUSINESS COUNCIL MEMBERS 
ARTICLE  VI—REMOVAL  OF  PAWNEE  BUSINESS  COUNCIL  MEMBERS 

SECTION  1.  The  Nasharo  Council  shall  investigate  complaints  of 
SECTION  1.  The Nasharo  Council  shall  investigate  complaints of 
misconduct  in  office  of  members  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  and 
misconduct in office of members of the Pawnee Business Council and 
upon  a  proper  showing  shall  call  a  joint  meeting  of  the  Pawnee) 
upon a proper  showing shall  call  a joint  meeting of  the  Pawnee 
Business  Council  and  the  Nasharo  Council  to  act  upon  such  com 
Business Council and the Nasharo Council  to  act  upon such com-
plaints.  Such  joint  council  shall  have  the  power,  by  a  majority 
plaints.  Such joint  council  shall  have the power,  by a majority 
vote,  after  giving  the  accused  a  hearing,  to  remove  him  from  office, 
vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him from office, 

4 
4 

provided  that  at  least  five  members  from  each  of  the  councils  are 
provided that  at least  five  members from each of the  councils are 
present. 
present. 

ARTICLE VII— BILL or RIGHTS 
ARTICLE  V I I — B I L L  OP  R I G H T S 

SECTION 1.  All members of the Tribe shall enjoy without hindrance 
SECTION  1.  All  members  of  the  Tribe  shall  enjoy  without  hindrance 
freedom  of  worship,  conscience,  speech,  press,  assembly  and  asso 
freedom of worship, conscience,  speech,  press,  assembly  and asso-
ciation. 
ciation. 

SEC.  2.  This Constitution shall  not in  any way alter,  abridge or 
SEC.  2.  This  Constitution  shall  not  m  any  way  alter,  abridge  o r 
otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of this 
otherwise  jeopardize  the  rights  and  privileges  of  the  members  of  this 
Tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or of the United States. 
Tribe  as citizens of  the State  of  Oklahoma  or  of  the  United  States. 

SEC.  3.  The individual property rights of any member of the Tribe 
SEC.  3.  The  individual  property  rights  of  any  member  of  the  Tribe 
shall not be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions 
shall  not  be  altered,  abridged  or  otherwise  affected  by  the  provisions 
of this Constitution and 13-laws  without the consent of such indi-
of  this  Constitution  and  By-laws  without  the  consent  of  such  indi 
vidual  member. 
vidual member. 

ARTICLE VIII— AmammaNTs 
ARTICLE  V I I I — A M E N D M E N T S 

Amendments  to  this  Constitution  and  the  attached  By-laws  may 
Amendments to this  Constitution and the attached By-laws may 
be  proposed  by  a  majority  vote  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  OP 
be proposed by a majority vote of  the Pawnee Business Council or 
by  a  petition  signed  by  thirty  per  cent  of  the  adult  members  of  the 
by a petition signed by thirty per cent of the adult members of the 
Tribe,  and  if  approved  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  shall  be 
Tribe,  and if  approved by the Secretary  of  the Interior,  shall  be 
submitted  to  a  referendum  vote  of  the  adult  members  of  the  Tribe, 
submitted to a referendum vote of the adult members of the Tribe, 
and  shall  be  effective  if  approved  by  a  two-thirds  vote  of  the  adult 
and shall be effective if approved by a two-thirds vote of the adult 
members  voting  in  person,  provided  that  at  least  fifty  votes  are  cast. 
members voting in person, provided that at least fifty votes are cast. 
 
 

BY-LAWS 
BY-LAWS 

 
 ARTICLE  I— DIITIES  or OFFICERS 
ARTICLE  I — D U T I E S  o r  OFFICERS 

SECTION  1.  The  President  shall  preside  at  all  meetings  of 
the 
SECTION  1.  The  President  shall  preside  at  all  meetings  of  the 
Pawnee  Business  Council,  joint  meetings  of  the  Pawnee  Business 
Pawnee Business  Council,  joint  meetings  of  the  Pawnee  Business 
Council  and  the  Nasharo  Council,  and  all  general  tribal  meetings. 
Council and the Nasharo Council, and all  general tribal  meetings. 
He  shall  have  general  supervision  of  the  affairs  of  the  Pawnee 
He shall  have  general  supervision  of  the  affairs  of  the  Pawnee 
Business  Council  and  shall  perform  all  duties  appertaining  to  the 
Business Council  and shall perform all  duties appertaining to the 
office  of  President. 
office of President. 

gjrform  the  duties  of  that  office. 

SEC.  2.  In  the  absence  of  the  President,  the  Vice-President  shall 
SEC.  2.  In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall 
I n  case  of  vacancy,  the  Vice-
perform the  duties of  that  office.  In case  of  vacancy,  the  Vice-
resident  shall  succeed  at  once  to  the  office  of  the  President  until  a 
President shall succeed at once to the office of the President until a 
President  is  regularly  selected. 
President is regularly selected. 

SEC.  3.  The  Secretary-Treasurer  shall  correctly  record  the  proceed 
Sac. 3.  The Secretary-Treasurer shall correctly record the proceed-
ings  of  all  meetings  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council,  joint  meetings 
ings of all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council. joint meetings 
of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  and  the  Nasharo  Council,  and  all 
of the Pawnee Business Council and the  Nasharo Council, and all 
general  tribal  meetings.  He  shall  make out  the  order  of  the  business 
general tribal meetings.  He shall make out the order of the business 
for  the  President,  shall  notify  all  committees  of  their  appointments, 
for the President, shall notify all  committees of their appointments, 
shall  have  custody  of  the  records  and  all  papers  of  the  Pawnee  Busi 
shall have custody of the records and all papers of the Pawnee Busi-
ness  Council^  which  records  and  papers  shall  be  open  to  inspection 
ness Council l which records and papers shall be open to  inspection 
at  any  time, m  his  presence, by  any  member  of  the  Tribe  desiring  to 
at any time, m his presence, by any member of the Tribe desiring to 
read  same.  He  shall  keep  a correct  list  of  all  members  of  the  Tribe, 
read same.  He shall keep a correct list of all members of the Tribe, 
shall  authenticate  all  accounts  or  orders  of  the  Pawnee  Business 
shall  authenticate  all  accounts or  orders  of  the  Pawnee  Business 
Council  and,  in  the  absence  of  the  President  and  Vice-President, 
Council  and,  in  the  absence  of the  President  and Vice-President, 
shall  call  meetings  to  order  until  a  chairman  pro  tern  is  selected.. 
shall  call  meetings to  order until  a chairman  pro tern is selected. 
H e  shall  render  written  reports  upon  the  order  of  the  Pawnee  Busi-
He shall render written reports upon the order of the Pawnee Busi-
neess  Council.  He  shall  issue  notices  of  all  meetings  and  conduct 
neess Council.  He shall  issue  notices  of  all  meetings and conduct 
all  general  correspondence,  as  directed  by  the  Pawnee  Business 
all  general  correspondence,  as  directed  by  the  Pawnee  Business 

5 
5 

Council.  He  shall  receive  all  moneys  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Coun 
Council.  He shall receive all moneys of the Pawnee Business Coun-
cil  and  keep  an  accurate  account  of  receipts  and  disbursements. 
cil  and keep an accurate account of receipts and disbursements. 

The  Secretary-Treasurer  shall  keep  all  such  moneys  entrusted  to 
The Secretary-Treasurer shall  keep all  such moneys entrusted to 
his  care  in  a  special  account  and  shall  disburse  said  funds  only  upon 
his care in a special account and shall disburse said funds only upon 
the  order  of  the  Pawnee  Business  Council.  At  any  time  that  such 
the order of the Pawnee Business Council.  At any time that such 
account  shall  amount  to  more  than  $50,  he  shall  file  a  bond  satis 
account shall  amount to  more than $50,  he shall file  a bond satis-
factory  to  the  Pawnee  Business  Council  and  the  Commissioner  of 
factory to the Pawnee Business  Council and the  Commissioner of 
Indian  Affairs.  The  cost  of  such  bond  shall  be  paid  out  of  Tribal 
Indian Affairs.  The cost of such bond shall be paid out of Tribal 
moneys. 
moneys. 

ARTICLE II— PLACE OF MEETINGS 
ARTICLE  I I — P L A C E  OF  MEETINGS 

Unless  some  other  point  under  the  Pawnee  Indian  Agency  Juris 
Unless some other point under the Pawnee Indian Agency Juris-
diction  is designated  in  the  call  or  notice,  all  meetings  of  the  Pawnee 
diction is designated in the call or notice, all meetings of the Pawnee 
Business Council and  of  the  Nasharo  Council  shall  be held  at  Pawnee, 
Business Council and of the Nasharo Council shall be held at Pawnee, 
Oklahoma. 
Oklahoma. 

ARTICLE III—ADOPTION 
ARTICLE  III—ADOPTION 

This  Constitution  and  By-laws  shall  be effective  when  approved  by 
This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved by 
the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  and  ratified  by  a  majority  of  the  mem 
the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority of the mem-
bers  of  the  Pawnee  Indian  Tribe  of  Oklahoma  voting  at  an  election 
bers of the Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma voting at an election 
called  by  the  Secretary  of  the  Interior  under  the  rules  and  regula 
called by the Secretary of the Interior under the rules  and regula-
tions which  he  may  prescribe  pursuant  to  Section  3 of  the  Oklahoma 
tions which he may prescribe pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma 
Indian  Welfare  Act  of  June  26,1936. 
Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936. 

I,  Oscar  L.  Chapman,  the  Assistant  Secretary  of  the  Interior  of 
I,  Oscar L.  Chapman, the Assistant  Secretary of the Interior of 
the  United  States  of  America,  by  virtue  of  the  authority  granted  me 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by  the  Act  of  June  26,  1936  (49  Stat.  1967),  do  hereby  approve  the 
by the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat.  1967), do hereby approve the 
attached  Constitution  and  By-laws  of  the  Pawnee  Indian  Tribe  of 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Pawnee Indian Tribe of 
Oklahoma. 
Oklahoma. 

Assistant  Secretary  of  the 
Interior. 
Assistant Secretary of the Interior. 

OSCAR L. CHAPMAN, 
OSCAR  L.  CHAPMAN, 

WASHINGTON,  D.  C ,  November 
26,1937. 
W ASHINGTON, D. C.,  November 26, 1937. 

[SEAL] 
[SEAL] 
 
 

CERTIFICATION  OF  ADOPTION 
CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION 

 
 Pursuant  to  an  order,  approved  November  26,  1937  by  the  Assist 
Pursuant to an order, approved November 26, 1937 by the Assist-
ant  Secretary  of  the  Interior,  the  attached  Constitution  and  By-laws 
ant Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws 
was  submitted  for  ratification  to  the  members  of  the  Pawnee  Indian 
was submitted for ratification to the members of the Pawnee Indian 
Tribe  of  Oklahoma  and  was  on  January  6,  1938  duly  adopted  by  a 
Tribe of Oklahoma and was on January 6,  1938 duly adopted by a 
vote  of  197  for,  and  60  against,  in  an  election  in  which  over  30  per 
vote of 197 for,  and 60 against, in  an election in which over 30 per 
cent  of  those  entitled  to  vote  cast  their  ballots,  pursuant  to  section  3 
cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant to section 3 
of  the  Oklahoma  Indian  Welfare  Act  of  June  26,1936  (49 Stat.  1967). 
of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967). 

GEORGE H. ROBERTS, 
GEORGE  H.  ROBERTS, 

President,  Pawnee  Business  Council. 
President, Pawnee Business Council. 

Secretary-Treasurer,  Pawnee  Business  Council. 
Secretary-Treasurer, Pawnee Business Council. 

HARRY D. CUMMINGS, 
HARRY  D.  CUMMINGS, 

LEX A. Towns 
LEM  A.  TOWERS, 

Superintendent,  Pawnee  Indian  Agency. 
Superintendent, Pawnee Indian Agency. 

0 

o 

