 
  
  
  
 CONSTITUTION 
of the  
 
PAWNEE NATION 
 
 of  
 
OKLAHOMA

 
 (Revised and amended by Referendum vote on July 14, 1998, January 4, 2003, 
June 14, 2008 and further revised by referendum vote on May 1, 2021)
 
 

CONSTITUTION
OF THE PAWNEE NATION 
OF OKLAHOMA

 
 (Revised and amended by Referendum vote on July 14, 1998, January 4, 2003, 
June 14, 2008 and further revised by referendum vote on May 1, 2021)
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the four confederated bands of Indians, namely, Chaui, Kitkehahki, 
Pitahawirata and Skidi which now constitute the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, with faith 
in the purposes of our Supreme Being, with abounding pride in our cultural heritage and 
the determination to promote through marshaled efforts our social, economical and 
political advancement, do solemnly ordain and establish this Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma 
and adopt this constitution pursuant to the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 
1936 (49 Stat. 1967) which shall supersede the constitution approved by the Secretary of 
the Interior on November 26, 1937, and ratified on January 6, 1938, as amended.

The name of this organization shall be the “Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.”
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

ARTICLE II - PURPOSE
 
 Section 1. To secure for the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and its members rights, powers, 

privileges and benefits of a sovereign nation.

Section 2. To establish its Jurisdiction and Powers.

(i) 

(ii) 

The governmental powers of the Pawnee Business Council, acting for the 
sovereign Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall extend to all persons and to all 
real and personal property including lands and other natural resources, and to 
all waters and air space, within the Indian Country over which the Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma has jurisdiction. The governmental powers of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall also extend outside the exterior boundaries 
of Indian Country to any persons or properties which are, or may be included 
within the jurisdiction of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
The Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered to maintain under any laws of 
the U.S. and/or Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma’s law and order, and judicial 

systems to protect the peace, safety, health, and welfare of the members of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, provided the concepts of separation of powers is 
maintained.

(iii)  The Constitution is the supreme law of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma and

all persons subject to its jurisdiction. The Pawnee Business Council shall 
exercise its power consistent with the provisions of this Constitution and the 
Corporate Charter of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE
 
 Section 1. The current membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall consist of:

(a)  All persons enrolled or entitled to be enrolled on the official annuity (base) 

roll of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma as of February 19, 1937; and
(b)  All children born of a lawful marriage between members of the Tribe 

since the date of said roll;

(c)  All children of one-quarter (1/4) or more Pawnee Indian blood born on or 

after February 9, 1938, of a lawful marriage of an enrolled member.

Section 2. The future membership of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, after the adoption 
of this Constitution, shall include any individual who applies for membership and 
possesses at least one-eighth (1/8) degree Pawnee Indian Blood, as amended on January 
4, 2003 on Amendment Number 1.
Section 3. The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to prescribe rules and 
regulations covering future membership of the Pawnee Nation, including the approval 
and loss of membership, provided:

(i) 

(ii) 

Such rules and regulations shall be subject to the review of the Nasharo 
Council;
A person shall not be eligible for membership, if enrolled as a member of 
another Indian Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - PAWNEE BUSINESS COUNCIL
 
 Section 1. The supreme governing body of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall be the 
Pawnee Business Council, which shall consist of eight (8) members.
Section 2. Subject to the limitations imposed by this Constitution and applicable Federal 
law, the Pawnee Business Council shall exercise all the inherent, statutory, and treaty 
powers of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma by the enactment of legislation, the 
transaction of business, and by otherwise speaking or acting on behalf of the Pawnee 
Nation of Oklahoma on all matters which the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma is empowered 
to act, including the authority to hire legal counsel to represent the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma.
Section 3. All acts regarding Membership or Claims or Treaty Rights of the Pawnee 
Business Council shall be subject to review by the Nasharo Council in accordance with 
this Constitution.
Section 4. The present Pawnee Business Council members shall serve until the next 
regular election or until their successors are elected and installed provided:

(i) 

The Pawnee Business Council shall provide an election commission to 
conduct all elections, provided that regular elections are held on the first 
Saturday in May of each odd numbered year.

(ii) 

No member of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, eighteen (18) years of age or 
older, shall be denied the right to vote by secret ballot, either in person or by 
absentee ballot, provided that no write-in votes shall be allowed.

(iii)  Members of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma, twenty-five (25) years of age or 
older, shall be eligible for election to the Pawnee Business Council. Members 
of the Pawnee Nation convicted of a felony or dishonorably discharged from 
the Armed Forces of the United States of America are ineligible for 
candidacy.

(iv)  At the first regular election after the adoption of this Constitution (1999), the 

President, Treasurer, and the First and Second Council Members shall be 
elected to a four year term and the Vice-President, Secretary, and Third and 
Fourth Council Members shall be elected to a two-year term in order to 
stagger the terms of office:
(a)  Candidates shall declare the position they are seeking.
(b)  If there are positions which are vacant due to lack of candidates, those 
positions shall be considered vacant and filled according to Article VI. 
Thereafter, all members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be elected to a 
four-year term of office and shall serve until their successors shall be duly 
installed in office. In cases when a vacancy is being filled to complete an un
expired term due to death, resignation, forfeiture, or recall of a Pawnee Business 
Council member, a successor will be appointed pursuant to Article VI of this 
Constitution.

(v) 

A Nasharo Council member shall resign his/her position if elected or 
appointed to the Pawnee Business Council.

(vi)  A Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma employee shall resign his/her position if 

elected or appointed to the Pawnee Business Council.

(vii)  A Pawnee Business Council member shall not be eligible for employment by 

the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

(ix) 

(viii)  Elected members of the Pawnee Business Council shall be inaugurated and 
sworn into office fourteen (14) calendar days after the Election Day.
Pawnee Business Council records and all related documentation for each 
outgoing Pawnee Business Council member shall be made available to the 
newly elected Pawnee Business Council members. Failure to comply shall 
result in ineligibility to file for candidacy for the Pawnee Business Council for 
ten (10) years or until records and documents are returned.

Section 5. All acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be determined by a majority 
vote of the membership present, provided five (5) members of the Council shall 
constitute a quorum to transact business. In the event of a tie, the chairperson or 
chairperson pro tem shall cast the deciding vote.
Section 6. Regular quarterly meetings of the Pawnee Business Council shall be held on 
the first Saturday in February, June, August and November of each year in a place 
designated by the Pawnee Business Council, provided:

(i) 
(ii) 

Special meetings may be called by the President.
Special meetings shall be called by the President within two (2) weeks after
receiving a written request, by regular mail or by certified and return receipt 
mail, from a majority of the occupied Pawnee Business Council positions, 
provided:

(a)  If the President fails to call and conduct a special meeting as requested 

within two (2) weeks, a majority of the occupied members of the Pawnee 
Business Council shall be authorized to call and conduct a special meeting 
by affixing their signatures to a document listing in detail the need for the 
meeting and citing this Section of the Constitution as their authority to 
meet.

(b)  A minimum of two (2) days notice of all meetings, regular or special, shall 
be published in a newspaper and posted in public view. Provided, that in 
an emergency, posting in public view for two (2) days shall be deemed 
sufficient notice. Notice shall include the agenda.

Section 7. All members of the Pawnee Business Council shall attend tribal constitution 
orientation classes as prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. The President shall preside at all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council, 
joint meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo Council, and all general 
meetings and shall vote only in the case of a tie. The President shall have general 
supervision of the affairs of the Pawnee Business Council and shall perform all duties 
pertaining to the office of the President. The President shall administer oaths and 
affirmations when required or permitted. The President shall be bonded.
Section 2. In the absence of the President, the Vice-President shall perform the duties of 
that office. In the case of vacancy, the Vice-President shall succeed at once to the office 
of the President. The Vice-President shall be bonded.
Section 3. The Secretary shall, be responsible for the following duties:

(i) 

Record the proceedings of all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and 
Nasharo Council, and all special meetings as assigned by the Pawnee Business 
Council.
(ii) 
Prepare the agenda for meetings of the Pawnee Business Council.
(iii)  Maintain all records and files of the Pawnee Business Council. All records
and files of the Pawnee Business Council, except such records as shall be 
explicitly made exempt by law, shall be public information to any member of 
the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.

(iv)  Maintain the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma official membership roll.
(v) 
(vi) 

Attest to enactments of the Pawnee Business Council.
In absence of the President and Vice-President, call to order regular and 
special meetings of the Pawnee Business Council until a Chairman pro tem is 
selected.

(vii)  Perform the duties of the Treasurer, in the absence of the Treasurer.
(viii)  The Secretary shall be bonded.

Section 4. The Treasurer shall, be responsible for the following duties:

(i) 

(ii) 

Receive funds from all sources for which the Pawnee Business Council is held 
accountable, and maintain financial records which shall reflect actual receipts 
and disbursements of all funds and which shall reflect the financial position of 
the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
Deposit funds from any and all sources for which the Pawnee Business 
Council is held accountable in an insured bank or other approved financial 
institution.

(iii)  Disburse by check, the funds from any and all funds for which the Pawnee 
Business Council. All checks shall be signed by the Treasurer and 
countersigned by the President.

(iv)  An annual independent audit of all funds for which the Pawnee Business 

(v) 

Council is held accountable.
Present financial status reports and budget reports as determined by the 
Pawnee Business Council.
Perform the duties of Secretary, in the absence of Secretary.

(vi) 
(vii)  The Treasurer shall be bonded.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. - In the event of Presidential vacancy, the Vice-President shall temporarily 
vacate their office and fulfill the duties of the office of President until another president is 
elected by a majority of Pawnee tribal voters in a specially called election. The Business 
Council shall elect from the current council membership a Temporary Vice President to 
serve until the next President is elected by a majority of Pawnee tribal voters in a 
specially called election, at which time the Temporary Vice President shall return to 
his/her previous position.
Section 2. - If the offices of President and Vice President are vacant the Treasurer shall 
temporarily vacate their office and fulfill the duties of President and the secretary shall 
temporarily vacate their office and fulfill the duties of Vice President. The Business 
Council shall elect from the current council membership a Temporary Treasurer and a 
Temporary Secretary until the next President and Vice President are elected by a majority 
of Pawnee tribal voters in a specially called election, at which time the Temporary 
Treasurer and Temporary Secretary shall return to their previous position.
Section 3. - If the offices of President, Vice President, and Treasurer are vacant the 
Secretary shall temporarily vacate their office and fulfill the duties of the President. The 
Business Council shall elect from the current council membership a Temporary Vice 
President, Temporary Treasurer, and Temporary Secretary until the next President, Vice 
President, and Treasurer are elected by a majority of Pawnee tribal voters in a specially 
called election, at which time the Temporary Vice President, Temporary Treasurer and 
Temporary Secretary shall return to their previous position.
Section 4. - Notwithstanding Article 4 Section 5, if four or more positions are vacant a 
quorum shall consist of all of the remaining members. If all officer positions are vacant 
any remaining council members may call a special Business Council meeting, at which 
that council member shall chair and the council shall elect officers.
Section 5. - If a vacancy occurs in a First, Second, Third, or Fourth Business Council 
member position before the last six months of a term, it shall be filled by a majority of 
Pawnee member voters in a specially called election.
Section 6. - If a vacancy occurs in a First, Second, Third, or Fourth Business Council 
member position in the latter six month of that term, that position shall remain vacant 
until the next general election.
Section 7. - If a vacancy occurs in any Business Council position in the six months prior 
to a general election, the specially called election shall be held with the general election. 
Section 8. - Any successful candidate who is elected in a special election shall serve only 
the remaining term of that vacant position.

Section 9. - Unless section 6 & 7 apply, the election Board shall set and conduct a 
special election within 60 days but not before 30 days after a position is vacant.
Section 10. - A position is vacant when:

(i) 

Subject to an effective date, a resignation is received in writing by the Office 
of the president

(ii)  Vacant pursuant to Article VII,  Section One
(iii)  Death
(iv)  Recall
(v) 
(vi)  A suspension  is  imposed under Section 3,  in which case a specially called

Removal

election is not required if the Business Council finds that suspension is likely 
to be resolved within six months. If the Business Council finds that the 
suspension is likely to be longer than six months, they may call a special 
election. If the suspension is removed, the person elected in the special 
election shall step down and the suspended Business Council Member shall 
retake their position.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - FORFEITURE, RECALL, SUSPENSION, REMOVAL 

 
 Section 1. Forfeiture - If a member of the Pawnee Business Council fails or refuses to 
attend two (2) regular or special meetings per year from the date of oath of office, unless 
excused by the Pawnee Business Council President for illness or other causes for which 
the member cannot be held responsible, his/her office shall be declared forfeited by a 
resolution of the Pawnee Business Council and the vacancy shall be filled.
Section 2.  Recall -

(i)  A petition for recall of any member of the Pawnee Business Council shall be:
filed with the Pawnee Nation Election Commission,

a) 
b)  verified by the Enrollment Department that thirty five percent (35%) 
of the number of voters who voted in the last regular election signed 
the petition, and

c) 

pay a filing fee not to exceed fifty percent (50%) of the total cost of 

the last regular election payable to the Election Commission.

(ii)  After receipt of the verified recall petition, the Election Commission shall call 
and hold a recall election within sixty (60) business days but not before thirty 
(30) business days.

(iii)  Recall shall be effective only if a majority of those voting shall vote in favor 
of such a recall and that at least fifty percent (50%) + one (1) of the number 
voting in the previous election vote in the recall election.

(iv)  Once a member has faced a recall attempt, no further recall action shall be 
brought against that member until at least twelve (12) consecutive months 
have passed. No member of the Pawnee Business Council shall be subject to a 
recall action within the first twelve (12) months of that member’s term.

Section 3. Suspension:

(i) 

A Pawnee Business Council member shall be suspended from the Business 
Council without compensation when:
(a)  charged with a criminal offense, and
(b)  that offense would be cause for removal as defined in Section 4.iv.(a), and

(c) 

the charging jurisdiction guarantees similar civil rights and due process as 
is guaranteed within the Pawnee Nation.

(ii) 

(iii) 

The suspension shall be effective from the date of the filing of the charges 
until dismissed.
It is the duty of the defendant Business Council Member to timely notify the 
Business Council and the Attorney General of the charges.

(iv)  A suspended Business Council Member is excused from attending meetings 

(v) 

(vi) 

and other official duty during the suspension.
Any vote cast or other official action taken after such charges have been filed 
shall be valid, but taking such official action while under suspension shall 
constitute the crime of unofficial misconduct.
The Business Council may by majority vote, with the subject member 
abstaining, lift the suspension if it finds that the requirements of paragraph (i) 
are not met.

(vii)  The suspended Business Council Member may bring a declaratory judgment 

(viii) 

action in Pawnee Nation Tribal Court to challenge the application of this 
Section.
If the charges are dismissed because the defendant is found innocent, the 
suspension is automatically removed and all withheld compensation shall be 
paid without interest.

Section 4  - Removal of Pawnee Business Council Members

(i) 

(ii) 

Removal for Cause - Pawnee Business Council members may be removed for 
cause by petition filed in Pawnee Nation District Court with right of appeal to 
the Pawnee Nation Supreme Court.
A petition may be filed only;
(a)  by the Attorney General, or
(b)  by Resolution of the Pawnee Business Council, or
(c)  by any individual or individuals who deposits $10,000 in cash or bond 

with the court clerk.

(iii)  Conviction is defined as a final conviction or a plea of no contest or guilty, 

whether or not dismissed, pardoned or expunged, and irrespective of whether 
it is denominated a felony, misdemeanor, or otherwise.
Cause if defined as:
(a)  conviction of any of the following offenses in any legitimate governmental 

(iv) 

jurisdiction:
A.  Fraud

1.  Making false representation
2.  Knowledge of such false representation by the perpetrator
3.  Reliance on the false representation by the person defrauded
4.  An intent to defraud
5.  The actual act of committing fraud
6.  Passing bad checks
7.  Knowingly possessing stolen property

B.  Evil Intent
1.  Arson
2.  Blackmail
3.  Embezzlement

4.  Extortion
5.  False pretenses
6.  Forgery
7.  Fraud
8.  Larceny (grand or petty)

C.  Crimes against property

1.  Malicious destruction of property
2.  Receiving stolen goods (with guilty knowledge)
3.  Robbery
4.  Theft (when it involved the intention of permanent taking)
5.  Transporting stolen property (with guilty knowledge)

D.  Crimes against Governmental authority

1.  Bribery
2.  Counterfeiting
3.  Fraud against revenue or other governmental functions
4.  Mail fraud
5.  Perjury
6.  Harboring a fugitive from justice (with guilty knowledge)
7.  Tax evasion (willful)
8.  Carry a concealed weapon
9.  Desertion from the Armed Forces
10. Dishonorable Discharge from the Armed Services
11. Failure to report for military induction
12. Drunk driving
13. Habitual drunkenness
14. Escape from prison
15. Gambling violations
16. Controlled Dangerous Substances violations
17. Liquor violations
18. Vagrancy

E.  Crimes committed against person, family relationship, and sexual 

morality
1.  Abandonment of a minor child (if willful and resulting in the 

destitution of the child)

2.  Assault

a.  Assault with intent to kill, commit rape, commit robbery 

or commit serious bodily harm

b.  Assault with a dangerous or deadly weapon

3.  Contributing to the delinquency of a minor
4.  Gross indecency
5.  Incest
6.  Kidnapping
7.  Lewdness
8.  Manslaughter
a. Voluntary
b. Involuntary, where the statue requires proof of recklessness

9.  Mayhem

10. Murder
11. Pandering
12. Prostitution
13. Rape (including “Statutory rape”)
14.  Sodomy
15. Libel/Slander
16. Mailing an obscene letter

(v) 

F.  Crimes attempting, aiding and abetting, accessories, and conspiracy

1.  an attempt to commit a crime listed in this Section,
2.  Aiding and abetting in the commission of a crime listed in this 

Section,

3.  Being an accessory (before or after the fact) in the commission of a 

crime listed in this Section,

4.  Taking part in conspiracy (or attempting to take part in a 
conspiracy) to commit a crime listed in this Section.

(b)  Willful neglect or refusal to fulfill statutory duties.
(c)  Intentional conduct reflecting very negatively on the dignity and integrity 

of the tribal government.

Court Review
(a) The District Court shall review the removal petition in a new trial. The 
Judge must hold an initial hearing within 30 days and resolve the case 
within 90 days. The petitioner must prove the facts by clear and 
convincing evidence. Any party to the case shall have a right to appeal.
(b)  The defending Council member may be represented by Counsel. If the 
Court denies the petition then the defending Council member shall be 
awarded costs and attorney fees not to exceed $10,000.00.

(c)  If the petition was filed by Business Council or the Attorney General the 
cost of attorney fees shall be paid from tribal funds. If the petition was 
filed by an individual the cost of attorney fees shall be paid from the 
deposit. An exonerated Council member charged under paragraph (iv) (b) 
or (iv) (c) of this Section shall not be charged again under such paragraph 
until more than twelve months have passed since the previous petition was 
filed.

(d)  If a petition filed by individual(s) is successful then their $10,000 deposit 
shall be refunded. If the attorney fees of a winning defendant are less than 
$10,000 then the balance shall be refunded.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - NASHARO COUNCIL
 
 Section 1. The Nasharo Council shall consist of eight (8) members with a quorum of five 
(5) to transact business. Each band shall have two (2) representatives on the Nasharo 
Council selected by the members of the tribal bands, Chaui, Kitkehahki, Pitahawirata and 
Skidi. The Nasharo Council shall have the right to review all acts of the Pawnee Business 
Council regarding the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma membership and Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma claims or rights growing out of treaties between the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma and the United States, provided:

(i) 

Such acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be valid and valid unless 
formally disapproved by the Nasharo Council within thirty (30) days after 
such acts are referred to the latter Council;

(ii)  Where such are disapproved by the Nasharo Council, the Pawnee Business 

Council may submit them to a referendum of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma 
and they shall be valid and effective if approved by a majority vote of the 
adult members voting in person or by absentee ballot; provided, that, at least 
fifty (50) of those qualified to vote shall cast ballots in such election.

Section 2. The Bands of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall elect their respective 
representative under rules and regulations prescribed by the Chiefs of each Band. The 
representatives selected shall serve until the next regular selection of members of the 
Nasharo Council.
Section 3. Vacancies in the membership of the Nasharo Council shall be filled under 
rules and regulations prescribed by the Nasharo Council.
Section 4. The Nasharo Council shall have the power to establish its own offices and to 
designate its own officers, to fix is own meeting days, and to adopt its own rules of 
procedure; provided a quorum is present to transact business. Records of the proceedings 
of this body shall be kept.
Section 5. All members of the Nasharo Council shall attend tribal constitution classes as 
prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - COURTS

 
 Section 1. Establishment of Authority - The judicial power of the Pawnee Nation of 
Oklahoma shall be vested in the current Pawnee Nation Courts established by Resolution 
93-65 and shall consist of five Justices and at least one trial court, known as the District 
Court, and additional courts as may be established by tribal law. The courts shall be a 
separate branch of government.
Section 2. Jurisdiction - The Courts of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma shall be courts 
of general jurisdiction and shall further have jurisdiction in all cases arising under the 
constitution, laws, and treaties of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. The Supreme Court 
shall have original jurisdiction in only such cases as may be provided by law, and shall 
have appellate jurisdiction in all other cases.
Section 3. Selection of Judicial Officers - The Justices of the Supreme Court and 
Judges of District Courts shall be selected by a majority vote of the Business Council. 
Justices and Judges may by Supreme Court rule assume the duties of a member of the 
other court to hear a specific case in which the regular Justices or Judges are disqualified 
or are otherwise unable to perform their duty as to the case.
Section 4. Term of Office - The Justices and Judges of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma 
shall serve six year terms beginning at the date of their confirmation in office and 
continuing if reconfirmed or until their successor shall be duly confirmed and installed. 
Section 5. Removal - Justices and Judges of the Pawnee nation of Oklahoma may be 
removed from office only by a majority of the other active Justices and Judges sitting 
together upon a showing of habitual neglect of the duties of office, oppression in office 
for personal gain or advantage, or for cause as defined in Section 4, D. In no case may a 
judicial officer be removed from office because of his decision in any case before the 
Court.

Section 6. Judicial Review - The Courts are specifically authorized to review, in any 
case properly before them, the actions of the Business Council, or any other officers, 
agents, or employees of the government of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma to determine 
whether those actions are prohibited by Federal law, this constitution or the laws of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. If the action complained of is outside the scope of 
authority delegated to entity in question, or if a proper authority is being exercised in a 
prohibited manner, the Court may enter injunction or other proper equitable relief or 
declare the action unconstitutional and void as justice may require.
Section 7. Effective date, Interim Provision - This article shall be effective upon 
approval in accord with Article X. The Business Council shall thereafter have the 
authority to enact such laws as may be necessary for the full and proper functioning of 
the Courts of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma not inconsistent with this article. All 
current laws regarding courts shall remain in effect and as amended to the extent that they 
do not conflict with this Constitution.
Section 8. Court Funding - The Court shall be funded in a reasonable amount in the 
annual budget.

1.  Court funding shall be equal to or exceed funding amounts for 
fiscal year 2007.
2.  In the event that overall funding shortfalls require budget cuts, the 
court budget may be reduced but proportionately not more than any 
other department.
 
 

ARTICLE X - BILL OF RIGHTS
 
 Section 1. All members of the Pawnee Nation shall enjoy without hindrance freedom of 
worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly, and association.
Section 2. The Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize 
the rights and privileges of the Pawnee Nation as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or of 
the United States. The Indian Civil Rights Acts of 1968 (ICRA) and rights guaranteed 
under this Act is applicable to the tribal members and other persons within tribal 
jurisdiction.
Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Pawnee Nation shall not 
be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this Constitution and By
Laws without the consent of such individual member.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the Pawnee 
Business Council or by a petition signed by at least fifty (50) of the adult members of the 
Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma.
This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the 
Pawnee Nation voting in an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of Interior 
and conducted pursuant to the rules and regulations of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. 
Provided, that, at least fifty (50) of those qualified to vote shall cast ballots in such 
election. The amendment shall become effective when approved by the Secretary of 
Interior, so long as such approval is required by Federal law, and ratified by the adult 
members of the Nation.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - PLACE OF MEETINGS

 
 Unless some other location in the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma jurisdiction is designated 
in the notice, all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and of the Nasharo Council 
shall be held at the Pawnee Nation Reserve at Pawnee, Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution when approved by the Secretary of Interior, shall be submitted to 
referendum vote of the adult members of the Nation, and shall become effective if 
approved by two-thirds vote of the adult members voting in person, provided that at least 
fifty votes are cast.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - SAVINGS CLAUSE
 
 All enactments of the Nation adopted before the effective date of this Constitution shall 
continue in effect to the extent to that they are not inconsistent with this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - SEVERABILITY
 
 If any part of this Constitution is held by the Federal Court to be invalid or contrary to the 
U.S. Constitution or Federal law, the remainder shall continue to be in full force and 
effect.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL
 
 I, NANCY JEMISON, Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the 
authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of 
June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967) and delegated to me by Secretarial Order No. 3150 as 
extended by Secretarial Order No. 3177, as amended, do hereby approve the Constitution 
of the Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma. This Constitution is effective on the date ratified by 
the adult members of the Pawnee Tribe of Oklahoma; PROVIDED, that nothing in this 
approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be 
contrary to Federal law.
 
 

NANCY JEMISON 
 
 Acting Deputy Commissioner 
Of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.
Date: April 27, 1998

