Constitution and By-Laws of the Pawnee Indians of Oklahoma

As ratified January 6, 1938 and amended to July 24, 1982.

*Document Note: While the National Indian Law Library (NILL) makes a 
strong attempt to provide the most current and complete copies of codes and 
constitutions, and the copy of the code or constitution on the NILL web site may 
in some cases be identical to the "official" version, the library provides this 
digital copy for research purposes only. NILL recommends that you contact the 
tribe for the "official" version. The Pawnee Nation of Oklahoma has a web site 
(http://www.pawneenation.org/) and can be reached at PO Box 470, Pawnee, 
OK 74058, (p) 918-762-3621, (f) 918-762-6446 (contact information from the 
web site).

Table of Contents

Preamble

Article VII - Bill of Rights

Article I - Name

Article VIII - Amendments

Article II - Purpose

By-Laws

Article III  - Membership of Tribe

Article I  - Duties of 

Article IV  - Pawnee Business 
Council

Article V  - Nasharo Council

Article VI  - Removal of Pawnee 
Business Council Members

Officers

Article II - Place of 

Meetings

Article III 

- Adoption

Constitution and By-Laws of the Pawnee Indians of Oklahoma

As ratified January 6, 1938 and amended to July 24, 1982.
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We the members of the four confederated band of Indians, namely, Chaui, 
Kitkehahke, Petahauerate and Skeedee which now constitute the Pawnee 
Indians of Oklahoma, with faith in the purposes of our Supreme Being, with 
abounding pride in our racial heritages and with the determination to promote 
through marshalled efforts our social, economic and political advancement, do 
solemnly ordain and establish this organization and adopt this Constitution and 
By-laws pursuant to the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 
Stat. 196).
 
  
 

ARTICLE I 
 
 Name

The name of this organization shall be the "Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma." 
 

ARTICLE II 

Purpose 
(amended 7-24-82)

The purposes of this organization shall be:

(a) To define, establish and safeguard the rights, powers, privileges and 
benefits of the Tribe and its members;

(b) To secure for the Tribe and its members the rights, powers, privileges and 

benefits available under the provisions of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act;

(c) To promote in other ways the common welfare of the Tribe and its 
membership;

(d) Jurisdiction and Powers of the Pawnee Business Council.

(i) The government powers of the Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma, 
a federally recognized sovereign Indian Tribe, shall, consistent with 
federal law, extend to all persons and to all real and personal 
property including lands and other natural resources and to all 
waters and airs space, within the Indian Country over which the 
Pawnee Tribe has authority. The governmental powers of the 
Pawnee Indian Tribe shall also, consistent with applicable federal 
laws, extend outside the exterior boundaries of the Pawnee Indian 
Country to any persons or property which are, as may hereafter be, 
included within the jurisdiction of the Tribe under any laws of the 
United States and of the Tribe.

(ii) The Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma is empowered to establish 
a Law and Order and Judicial System to protect peace, safety, health 
and welfare of the members of the tribe; provided the concept of 
separation of the Executive and Judicial powers is maintained. Once 
the Pawnee Tribe has ratified an Ordinance authorizing the 
establishment of these systems, it shall be the duty of the Pawnee 
Tribal Business Council to provide the necessary staff support for its 
implementation.

(iii) All law and order ordinances adopted by the Pawnee Business 
Council pursuant to this Article shall be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the interior or his designated representative, 
provided, however, that if said ordinance is not approved or 
disapproved by him within ninety (90) days of its receipt by him, the 
enactment shall automatically become effective.

(iv) This Constitution and By-laws, and the laws and ordinances 
enacted by the Pawnee Business Council shall be the supreme law of 
the Pawnee Indian Tribe and all persons subject to its jurisdiction; 
however, the Pawnee Business Council shall exercise its power 
consistent with the provisions of this constitution and bylaws, and 
applicable federal law.

(v)  In addition to powers authorized by paragraph (d) of this Article, 
the Pawnee Business Council shall be authorized to exercise those 
powers set forth in the Tribe's Corporate Charter issued by the 
Interior under the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act.

2 of 9

8/25/2005 3:29 PM
 
 

ARTICLE III 
 
 Membership of Tribe

Section 1. The membership of the Pawnee Indian Tribe of Oklahoma shall 
consist of the following persons:

(a) All persons enrolled or entitled to be enrolled on the official 
annuity roll of the Tribe as of February 19, 1937;

(b) All children born since the date of said roll of a lawful marriage, 
both of whose parents are members of the Tribe.

Section 2. The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to prescribe rules 
and regulations covering future membership of the Tribe, including the adoption 
and loss of membership, provided:

(a) That such rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior;

(b) That such, rules and regulations shall be subject to the approval 
of the Nasharo Council;

(c) That, after one year from the adoption of this Constitution, no 
person shall be admitted to membership who is of less than 
one-fourth (1/4) degree Pawnee Indian blood. (Pursuant to Section 
2, Article III of the Pawnee Constitution and By-laws the Resolution 
adopted February 9, 1938 by the Pawnee Business Council on the 
same date, which was approved by the Assistant Secretary of the 
Interior, provides that Article III, Section 2 (c) shall include the 
following: "(c) In addition to Article 3, Section 2, a child born of a 
lawful marriage, who is one-quarter (1/4) or more Pawnee Indian 
blood and, at least one of whose parents is enrolled as a Pawnee 
Indian, shall be admitted to membership in the Pawnee Tribe."
 
 

ARTICLE IV
 
 Pawnee Business Council

Section 1. The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be the Pawnee 
Business Council, which shall consist of eight members.

Section 2.  The Pawnee Business Council shall have power to appoint 
subordinate officers, committees and representatives, to transact business and 

otherwise speak or act on behalf of the Tribe in all matters on which the Tribe is 
empowered to act, provided:

(a) That the powers of the Tribe shall be set forth in detail in a 
Federal Charter to be requested by the Pawnee Business Council;

(b) That the acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be subject to 
review of the Nasharo Council in accordance with Section 2 of Article 
V of this Constitution.

Section 3. The present Pawnee Business Council shall serve until the next 
regular election provided for in Section 4 of this Article, or until their successor 
are elected and installed, provided:

(a) That within thirty (30) days after the adoption of this 
Constitution, the said council shall organize for business by selecting 
from among its membership a President, Vice President, and a 
Secretary-Treasurer.

Section 4. Regular elections of members of the Pawnee Business Council shall 
be held on the first Saturday, in May, 1939, and on the first Saturday in May of 
each second year thereafter, provided:

(a) That such elections shall be held under rules and regulations 
prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council which shall include 
provisions for absentee balloting;

(b) That all members of the Pawnee Indian Tribe, eighteen (18) 
years of age and older, shall be eligible to vote in these elections;

(c) That any person, in order to be eligible for election to 
membership on the Pawnee Business Council, must be a member of 
the Pawnee Indian Tribe, and must be twenty-five (25) years of age 
or older;

(d) That a member of the Nasharo Council shall not be eligible for 
election to the Pawnee Business Council;

(e) That members of the Pawnee Business Council elected pursuant 
to the provisions of this section shall be installed immediately after 
their election and the respective councils shall then organize for 
business by selecting from among their own membership a 
President, Vice President, and Secretary-Treasurer;

(f) That if a member of the council fails or refuses to attend two (2) 
regular or special meetings in succession, unless excused due to 
illness or other causes for which he cannot be held responsible, his 
office shall be declared forfeited by a resolution of the Pawnee 
Business Council, and the vacancy shall be filled pursuant to Article 
IV, Section 7 of the Constitution and By-laws of the Pawnee Indians

of Oklahoma.

Section 5. All acts of the Pawnee Business Council shall be determined by a 
majority vote of the membership present, provided that five members of the 
Council shall constitute a quorum to transact business.

Section 6. Regular meetings of the Pawnee Business Council shall be held on 
the first Saturday in February, May, August, and November of each year, 
provided:

(a) That special meetings may be called by the President at his 
discretion and shall be called by him within two (2) weeks after 
receiving written request by certified mail of five (5) members of the 
Pawnee Business Council;

(b) That a minimum of two (2) days notice of all meetings, regular 
or special, shall be published in a designated newspaper and posted 
in public view in a designated location: Provided that in an 
emergency, posting in public view for two (2) days shall be deemed 
sufficient notice.

Section 7. Vacancies in the membership of the Pawnee Business Council shall 
be filled for an unexpired term through appointment by the President, subject 
to the approval of the Council.

Section 8. All members of the Pawnee Business Council shall attend tribal 
Constitution and By-laws orientation classes as prescribed by the Pawnee 
Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V
 
 Nasharo Council

Section 1. The Nasharo Council shall consist of eight members selected from 
the Chieftainships of the following tribal bands: Chaui, Kitkehahke, Petahauerat 
and Skeedee, provided:

(a) That each band shall have two representatives on the Nasharo 
Council.

Section 2. The Nasharo Council shall have the right to review all acts of the 
Pawnee Business Council regarding tribal membership and tribal claims or 
rights growing out of treaties between the Tribe and the United States,

provided:

(a)  That such acts of the Pawnee -Business Council shall be valid 
and effective unless formally disapproved by the Nasharo Council 
within thirty (30) days after such acts are referred to the latter 
Council;

(b)  That where such acts are disapproved by the Nasharo Council, 
the Pawnee Business Council may submit them to a referendum of 
the Tribe and they shall be valid and effective if approved by a 
majority vote of the adult members voting in person, provided that 
at least fifty (S 0) votes are cast.

Section 3. Within thirty (30) days after the adoption of this Constitution, the 
tribal bands, referred to in Section 1 of this Article, shall select their respective 
representatives under rules and regulations prescribed by the respective band 
Chiefs, subject to the approval of the Superintendent of the Pawnee Indian 
Agency, provided:

(a) That the representatives so selected shall serve until the next 
regular selection of members of the Nasharo Council as provided for 
in Section 4 of this Article, or until their successors are selected.

Section 4.  Regular selections of members of the Nasharo Council shall be 
made on the first Saturday in May 1941, and on the first Saturday in May of 
each fourth year thereafter, provided:

(a) That such selections shall be made under rules and regulations 
prescribed by the Nasharo Council.

Section 5.  Any person selected to membership on the Nasharo Council shall be 
a member of the band which he represents and shall not be a member of the 
Pawnee Business Council.

Section 6. Vacancies in the membership of this Council shall be filled for an 
unexpired term in the same manner in which the preceding representative had 
been selected.

Section 7. The Nasharo Council shall have the power to establish its own 
offices and to designate its own officers, to fix its own meeting days and to 
adopt its own rules of procedure, provided that five members shall constitute a 
quorum to transact business. Records of the proceedings of this body shall be 
kept and a copy forwarded to the Superintendent of the Reservation.

Section 8. All members of the Nasharo Council shall attend tribal Constitution 
and By-laws orientation classes as prescribed by the Pawnee Business Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI
 
 Removal of Pawnee Business Council Members

Section 1. The Nasharo Council shall investigate complaints of misconduct in 
office of members of the Pawnee Business Council and upon a proper showing 
shall call a joint meeting of the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo 
Council to act upon such complaints. Such joint Council shall have the power, 
by a majority vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him from 
office, provided that at least five members from each of the councils are 
present.
 
 

ARTICLE VII 
 
 Bill of Rights

Section 1. All members of the Tribe shall enjoy without hindrance freedom of 
worship, conscience, speech, press, assembly and association.

Section 2. This Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise 
jeopardize the rights and privileges of the members of this Tribe as citizens of 
the State of Oklahoma or of the United States.

Section 3. The individual property rights of any member of the Tribe shall not 
be altered, abridged or otherwise affected by the provisions of this Constitution 
and By-laws without the consent of such individual member.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII 
 
 Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and the attached By-laws may be proposed by 
a majority vote of the Pawnee Business Council or by a petition signed by thirty 
(30) percent of the adult members of the Tribe, and if approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to a referendum vote of the adult 
members of the Tribe, and shall be effective if approved by a two-thirds (2 /3) 

vote of the adult members voting in person, provided that at least fifty (50) 
votes are cast.
 
 

BY-LAWS

ARTICLE I 
 
 Duties of Officers

Section 1. The President shall preside at all meetings of the Pawnee Business 
Council, joint meetings of the Pawnee Business Council and the Nasharo 
Council, and all general tribal meetings. He shall have general supervision of 
the affairs of the Pawnee Business Council and shall perform all duties 
appertaining to the office of President.

Section 2.  In the absence of the President, the Vice President shall perform the 
duties of that office. In the case of vacancy, the Vice President shall succeed at 
once to the office of the President until a President is regularly selected.

Section 3. The Secretary-Treasurer shall correctly record the proceedings of all 
meetings of the Pawnee Business Council, joint meetings of the Pawnee 
Business Council and the Nasharo Council, and all general tribal meetings. He 
shall make out the order of the business for the President, shall notify all 
committees of their appointments, shall have custody of the records and all 
papers of the Pawnee Business Council, which records and papers shall be open 
to inspection at any time, in his presence, by any member of the Tribe desiring 
to read same. He shall keep a correct list of all members of the Tribe, shall 
authenticate all accounts or orders of the Pawnee Business Council and, in the 
absence of the President and Vice President, shall call meetings to order until a 
chairman pro tern is selected. He shall render written reports upon the order of 
the Pawnee Business Council. He shall issue notices of all meetings and conduct 
all general correspondence, as directed by the Pawnee Business Council. He 
shall receive all moneys of the Pawnee Business Council and keep an accurate 
account of receipts and disbursements.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep all such moneys entrusted to his care in a 
special account and shall disburse said funds only upon the order of the Pawnee 
Business Council. All such moneys disbursed by the Secretary-Treasurer shall 
be countersigned by the President of the Business Council, and in the absence 
of the President, the disbursement of the funds shall be countersigned by the 
Vice President. At any time that such account shall amount to more than 
$50.00, he shall file a bond satisfactory to the Pawnee Business Council and the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond shall be paid out of tribal 
moneys.
 
 

ARTICLE II
 
 Place of Meetings

Unless some other point under the Pawnee Indian Agency jurisdiction is 
designated in the call or notice, all meetings of the Pawnee Business Council 
and of the Nasharo Council shall be held at Pawnee, Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE III 
 
 Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority of members of the Pawnee 
Indian Tribe of Oklahoma voting at an election called by the Secretary of the 
Interior under the rules and regulations which he may prescribe pursuant to 
Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936.

