 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 
OF THE 
PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS 
OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Approved: August 13, 1997

United States Department of the Interior

IN REPLY REFER TO:

Tribal Operations
 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

MUSKOGEE AREA OFFICE 
 
 101 N. 5TH STREET 
MUSKOGEE, OK 74401-6206

SEP - 5 1997

Honorable Donald E. Giles
Chief, Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma
P. O. Box 1527
Miami, Oklahoma 74354

Dear Chief Giles:

By memorandum dated August 13, 1997, the Acting Deputy Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs transmitted the Constitution of the Peoria Tribe 
of Indians of Oklahoma as adopted on July 23, 1997. This document 
was approved pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary 
of the Interior by the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 
(49 Stat. 1967), and delegated to the Deputy Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs by Secretarial Order No. 3150, as extended by Secretarial 
Order No. 3177, Amendment No. 2.

The results of the election held July 23, 1997, were forwarded to 
the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs on July 31, 1997. The 
election was called in accordance with an order issued by the 
Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs on March 31, 1997, which 
permitted the qualified voters of the Tribe to vote on the adoption 
or rejection of the proposed Constitution of the Peoria Tribe of 
Indians of Oklahoma.

The proposed constitution was duly adopted by a vote of 226 for, 7 
against, and 8 ballots found spoiled, in an election in which at 
least thirty percent of the 343 members registered and entitled to 
vote cast their ballots.

We wish to extend our congratulations on this accomplishment and 
are pleased to forward to you the approved original document.

Sincerely,

Area Director

Enclosure: Approved Constitution
 
 

CONSTITUTION

OF THE

PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA

 
 PREAMBLE........................................................................... Page 1

Article I.  Name..................................................Page 1

II. 

Jurisdiction........................................ Page 1

III.  Membership of Tribe......................... Page 2

IV. 

V. 

VI. 

Peoria Council ................................ Page 3

Elected Officials................................. Page 3

Duties of Officers............................... Page 3

VII. 

Grievance Committee........................Page 5

VIII. 

Powers.................................................Page 6

DC. 

X. 

XI. 

Elections .......................................... Page 7

Vacancies.............................................Page 9

Removal, Recall and Forfeiture .. Page 9

XII. 

Initiative and Referendum.........Page 10

XIII. 

XIV. 

Severability........................................ Page 11

Meetings ....................................... Page  11

XV. 

Quorum.............................................. Page 12

XVI. 

Tribal Court ..................................Page 13

XVII. 

Savings Clause...................................Page 13

XVIII. 

Civil Rights.........................................Page 13

XIX. 

Amendments ................................Page  14

XX. 

Ratification.........................................Page 14
 
 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 
PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, (initially organized under a Constitution 
ratified by the Tribal Council on July 30, 1981), desire to: promote the common welfare of 
our Tribe; protect our people, our land and natural resources, now and in the future; 
acquire additional lands for the benefit of the Tribe; protect our Indian heritage, including 
our religion, customs, and language; and to preserve, secure, and exercise all the inherent 
sovereign rights and powers hereby adopt the following Constitution pursuant to the 
Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

This Constitution shall supersede all previous Constitutions of the Peoria Tribe of Indians 
of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - JURISDICTION

 
 The authority and jurisdiction of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma shall extend to 
all the territory within the boundaries now known as Peoria lands, and to all lands which 
may be acquired for the Peoria Tribe by the United States Government or which may be 
acquired by the Peoria Tribe for its land base and to all Indian country of the Peoria Tribe 
and its citizens as of now or hereafter as defined by Federal law. The Peoria Tribe of 
Indians of Oklahoma may exercise its authority and jurisdiction outside the territory above 
described to the fullest extent not prohibited by Federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE III - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE

 
 Section 1. 
the following persons:

The membership of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma shall consist of 

(a) 

(b) 

All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official census 
roll of the Tribe dated January 1, 1937, and/or on the official 
membership roll of the Tribe as of August 3, 1956.

Any person of Peoria Indian blood who is descendant from a person 
whose name appears on the official census roll of the Tribe dated 
January 1, 1937, or on the official membership roll of the Tribe as of 
August 3, 1956, shall be eligible for membership, provided that such 
person is not a member of any other Federally recognized Tribe.

(c) 

Any child bom to a member of the Peoria Tribe shall be eligible for 
membership, provided such person is not a member of any other 
Federally recognized Tribe.

The Peoria Council shall have the power to prescribe rules and regulations 
Section 2. 
covering future membership, including loss of membership, not inconsistent with this 
Constitution.

Section 3. Enrollment Committee. The Enrollment Committee shall consist of three (3) 
persons selected by the Business Committee to certify the qualifications of prospective new 
enrollees of the Tribe under procedures consistent with this Constitution. Such prospective 
enrollees will be admitted to membership by the Business Committee at any Regular 
Monthly meeting, subject to final approval by the Peoria Council at any duly called 
meeting.

Section 4. Enrollment Ordinance. All enrollment procedures shall be conducted in 
accordance with an Enrollment Ordinance enacted by the Peoria Council, consistent with 
this Constitution. The purpose of the Ordinance is to establish guidelines and rules, ensure 
an individual receives equal protection and due process, develop orderly procedures to 
maintain a current membership roll and to provide for enrollment of eligible persons into 
membership of the Tribe. Such Ordinance shall provide for, but not be limited to: 
procedures for processing of membership applications, relinquishment and disenrollment 
of Tribal Members, the right to appeal decisions, and record keeping.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - PEORIA COUNCIL

 
 The Peoria Council shall consist of all tribal members who are at least eighteen (18) years 
of age and shall exercise those powers delegated to it by this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTED OFFICIALS

 
 The officials of the Tribe shall consist of seven (7) members of the Business Committee: 
Chief, Second Chief, Secretary, Treasurer, and three (3) Councilmen; and a five (5) member 
Grievance Committee who shall be elected in accordance with Article IX - Elections.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chief. It shall be the duty of the Chief to preside at all meetings and perform 
all duties appertaining to the office, also to act as chairman of the Business Committee.

Section 2. Second Chief. In the absence of the Chief; or during procedures to remove 
him or her, the Second Chief shall perform the duties of the Chief. In case of vacancy, the 
Second Chief shall succeed at once to the office of Chief until the next special or regular 
election for the office of Chief.

Section 3. 

Secretary. The duties of the Secretary shall include:

(a) 

Correctly recording the proceedings of all meetings;

(b)  Making out the order of business for the Chief;

(c) 

Notifying ail committee members of their appointments;

(d) 

(e) 

Being wholly responsible for all records and papers of the Peoria 
Council. These records and papers shall be held within the confines 
of the Peoria Tribal building, unless otherwise directed by the 
Business Committee or Peoria Council.

Providing for the inspection of the records and papers of the Peoria 
Council in his or her possession upon request of any member of the 
Peoria Council, provided that such inspection takes place within the 
Secretary's presence during normal working hours;

(f)  Maintaining the Tribe's membership roll, as well as a current list of 

the members of the Peoria Council;

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

(j) 

Authenticating all directives and resolutions of the Peoria Council and 
Business Committee;

In the absence of the Chief and Second Chief, calling meetings to 
order and presiding over the selection of a chairman pro tem;

Issuing notices of all meetings and conducting all general 
correspondence when directed to do so by the Peoria Council or 
Business Committee;

In the event of the simultaneous vacancies of the offices of Chief and 
Second Chief, the Secretary shall succeed at once to the office of Chief 
until the next special or regular election for the office of Chief.

All records and papers compiled, written by, or entrusted to the Secretary shall remain the 
property of the Peoria Tribe, and upon expiration of his or her term of office, all such 
records and papers in his or her possession shall be turned over to his or her successor.

Section 4. Treasurer. The duties of the Treasurer shall include:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Supervising receipt of ail monies of the Peoria Tribe and accurate 
accounting of receipts and disbursements;

Rendering a written financial report annually, and a quarterly report 
to all tribal members;

Supervising all tribal monies to be kept in a special account and 
disbursing such funds as may be directed by the Business Committee 
or the Peoria Council therefrom by check;

(d) 

Acquiring a bond to ensure proper performance of duties of the 
Business Committee.

All records and papers compiled, written by or entrusted to the Treasurer shall remain the 
property of the Peoria Tribe and upon expiration of his or her term of office, all such 
records and papers in his or her possession shall be turned over to his or her successor.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE

 
 Section 1. The Grievance Committee shall consist of five (5) members who shall be 
elected by the Peoria Council and who shall not be members of the Business Committee. 
This committee shall choose, from within its membership, a chairman and a secretary. The 
term of office shall be four (4) years.

Section 2. Meetings of the Grievance Committee may be called by the chairman and 
shall be called if a written request is received bearing the signature of at least three (3) 
members of the committee or if a petition is received signed by at least thirty (30) members 
of the Peoria Council.

Section 3. The Grievance Committee shall have the responsibility to decide 
Constitutional interpretations, by a majority vote of at least four (4) members, that should 
arise under any provision of this Constitution. The decision of the Grievance Committee 
shall be final.

Section 4. The Grievance Committee shall have the responsibility to determine disputes, 
by a majority vote of at least four (4) members, regarding any business conducted by the 
Business Committee. The decision of the Grievance Committee shall be brought before the 
Peoria Council at a special meeting called for the purpose of settling this dispute. The 
decision of the Peoria Council shall be final.

Section 5. If, within twenty (20) days after receipt of a written petition signed by at least 
thirty (30) members of the Peoria Council, a meeting of the Grievance Committee has not 
been duly conducted with at least four (4) members of the committee present, the 
designated spokesman for the petitioners shall be authorized to call and conduct a special 
meeting of the Peoria Council. The Peoria Council shall act on the complaint contained in 
the petition and its decision shall be final.

Section 6. The Grievance Committee shall be charged with the responsibility of insuring 
that the individual rights of members of the tribe, which have been guaranteed by the Act 
of April 11, 1968, P.L. 90-284 (82 Stat. 77), as amended, commonly referred to as the Indian 
Civil Rights Act, are not violated. When the Grievance Committee receives a complaint of 
a rights violation, it will conduct a hearing with all parties present. If, by a vote of at least 
four (4) members, the committee determines that the evidence presented is sufficient to 
substantiate the complaint, the committee shall call a special meeting of the Peoria Council 
to act upon the complaint. The decision of the Peoria Council is final.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS

 
 The Peoria Council shall be the supreme governing body of the Tribe. The 
Section 1. 
Peoria Council shall exercise those powers delegated to it by this Constitution, including, 
but not limited to:

(a) 

Approval of Annual budgets of Trust Fund expenditures.

(b) 

Approval of salaries and/or stipends of Business Committee 
members.

The Business Committee shall serve as the legislative body of the Tribe and 
Section 2. 
shall have the authority to act tn and on ail matters and subjects upon which the Tribe is 
empowered to act, now or in the future, including, but not limited to, the following:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

To represent the Tribe and act in all matters that concern the health, 
peace, safety and general welfare of the Tribe and all persons within 
its territory, and to make decisions not inconsistent with or contrary 
to the Constitution.

To negotiate and make contracts with Federal, Tribal, state and local 
governments, and with any individual, firm or company.

To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, or his 
authorized representative, so long as such approval is required by 
Federal law.

To veto the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of Tribal lands, or 
interest in Tribal lands, Tribal funds or other Tribal assets which may 
be authorized by any agency or employee of the Federal Government.

To regulate and provide for permits, leases, and assignments of land 
for business, homesite, and other purposes, and generally to provide 
for proper use and development of all Tribal lands, natural resources, 
and other Tribal property.

To regulate its own procedures, to appoint subordinate committees, 
commissions, boards, Tribal officials and employees not otherwise 
provided for in this Constitution, to prescribe their salaries, tenure 
and duties. Appointees to Constitutionally required committees shall 
be Tribal members.

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

The authority to establish and prescribe rules for governing Tribal 
courts and Tribal law enforcement agencies, and to provide for the 
maintenance of law and order on Tribal lands; subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized representative so long 
as such approval is required by federal law.

To protect and preserve the wildlife and natural resources of the 
Tribe; to regulate hunting, fishing, and trapping on Tribal lands.

To levy and collect taxes; to regulate the conduct of business within 
the territory of the Tribe; to charter public or private business, 
financial, and similar entities; and otherwise provide for the 
development of the economy within the territory of the Tribe.

(j) 

To enact codes, ordinances and resolutions necessary or incidental to 
the exercise of its legislative powers.

Section 3. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Peoria Tribe, but not 
expressly referred to in this Constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may be 
exercised by the people of the Peoria Tribe, through the adoption of appropriate 
constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election. All Business Committee members shall continue to hold office 
until their term expires under the previous Constitution. The first election of Secretary 
(formerly combined with Treasurer responsibilities) and the newly created Third 
Councilman shall take place within one hundred twenty (120) days following the effective 
date of this Constitution. These two officers shall be elected for a term expiring at the 
annual election to be held on the first Saturday of March 2000. Thereafter, all terms shall 
be for four (4) years.

The current Secretary-Treasurer shall continue to serve as Treasurer for the remainder of 
the current elective term.

Section 2. Annual Elections. The Constitution ratified July 30, 1981, established a 
system of staggered terms. This system shall continue with staggered elections of:

(a) 

Chief and two (2) members of the Grievance Committee.

(b) 

Secretary and Third Councilman.

(c) 

(d) 

Treasurer, First Councilman, and one (1) member of the Grievance 
Committee.

Second Chief, Second Councilman, and two (2) members of the 
Grievance Committee.

All terms of office shall be for four (4) years and elections shall be held on the first Saturday 
of March as required when such terms expire. Officials of the Business Committee and the 
Grievance Committee shall hold office until their successors are duly elected and installed.

Section 3. Election Committee. The Business Committee shall appoint five (5) members 
of the Peoria Council to serve on the Election Committee. Appointments shall be made in 
December for the following calendar year. The Election Committee shall be solely 
responsible for calling and conducting the regular election of officers and any other tribal 
elections which may be necessary throughout the year. No elective tribal official or 
candidate shall serve on the Election Committee.

Section 4.  Voter Eligibility. Any member of the Peoria Tribe shall be eligible to vote,
provided the member is eighteen (18) years of age or over on the date of the election.

Section 5. Qualifications of Candidates. Any member of the Peoria Tribe who is at least 
twenty-five (25) years of age on the date of the election; and who has never been convicted 
of a felony in a court of competent jurisdiction, shall qualify as a candidate for membership 
on the Business Committee or Grievance Committee.

Any member of the Peoria Tribe who files for an elective office and is currently holding 
another elective Tribal office, will upon filing, immediately resign his or her present office. 
Resigning from a present office will apply only if an incumbent files for a different elective 
office.

Section 6. Nominations. Nominations for the Business Committee and the Grievance 
Committee shall be filed with the Election Committee at least forty-five (45) days prior to 
the election in accordance with the Election Ordinance.

Section 7. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, including the first one under this 
Constitution, shall be conducted in accordance with an Election Ordinance enacted by the 
Business Committee consistent with this Constitution. Such Ordinance shall provide for 
filing procedures, secret balloting, majority election, tie votes, absentee balloting, a 
procedure for handling protests and resolving election disputes, and an oath of office. 
Provisions shall also be included regarding the conduct of recall, referendum and initiative 
elections and a uniform procedure for submitting and validating petitions.

Elections to amend this Constitution shall be conducted pursuant to Article XIX of this 
Constitution.

Section 8. Installation of Officers. Ail duly elected officials of the Peoria Tribe shall 
assume office immediately upon their election.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - VACANCIES

 
 Vacancies created in any elective office with an unexpired term exceeding six (6) months 
shall be filled within ninety (90) days by a regular or special election of the Peoria Council 
through election procedures established in Article IX.
 
 

ARTICLE XI  - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. Removal. Each elected or appointive body of the Peoria Tribe shall have the 
power to remove any of its members for cause by affirmative vote of a majority of the total 
membership of the elected or appointive body. The Business Committee shall adopt an 
ordinance providing for such removal. The procedures set out in the ordinance shall be 
used in removal proceedings by each of the elected or appointive bodies. Included in the 
ordinance shall be procedures for the accused to confront his or her accusers and speak on 
his or her behalf in answer to a written statement of the charges at a special meeting of the 
affected body called for that purpose. The accused shall be provided with the written 
statement of charges at least fifteen (15) days prior to the removal meeting. Such ordinance 
shall further provide that only one (1) person from any governmental body of the Tribe 
shall be considered for removal at any meeting called for that purpose. Should the process 
result in removal, no further removal shall be considered until the resulting vacancy has 
been filled. Any Tribal member who has knowledge of wrongdoing by a Tribal official 
may file such charges with the appropriate body.

In the event either the accused, accuser or the affected body requests an investigation into 
the matter, it shall be the duty of the Grievance Committee to conduct such investigation 
and within (20) days provide its findings to the affected body for its use in making a final 
determination.

In the event an official is accused of misfeasance or malfeasance in the office and the 
respective body refuses to invoke the removal process, such charges may be submitted in 
writing to the Grievance Committee. Upon its receipt of written charges, it shall be the 
duty of the Grievance Committee to determine whether such charges have sufficient 
substance to warrant serious consideration. If so, the Grievance Committee shall conduct 
a hearing within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the written charges.

The same advance notification and rights of the accused apply as set forth in this section. 
If the accused refuse to attend such hearing, it may be grounds for forfeiture of his office. 
If the accuser fails to attend, the charges may be dismissed. The Grievance Committee shall 
decide whether the accused shall be cleared of the charges or removed from office.

In the event a member of the Grievance Committee is the subject of removal action, the 
Business Committee shall be responsible for conducting the procedures stipulated above.

Section 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least ten percent (10%) 
of the Peoria Council, the Grievance Committee shall call and conduct, within sixty (60) 
days, an election for the purpose of recall of a tribal official holding elective office. The 
election shall be conducted pursuant to the Election Ordinance. Once an individual is 
subjected to recall proceedings, he or she shall not again be subject to such action during 
the balance of his or her term.

Section 3. Forfeiture. The affected governmental body shall immediately declare vacant 
any position within itself and promptly fill such vacancy in the manner provided in Article 
X, when it is determined that the incumbent:

(a)  Has died;

(b)  Has resigned;

(c)  Has been convicted of a felony while  in office;

(d)  Has been convicted, while in office, of a crime involving dishonesty;

(e) 

Has been absent without being excused by the respective body for 
more than three (3) consecutive meetings.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Initiative is the procedure whereby the members of the Peoria Council may 
exercise their right to present to the Business Committee proposed legislation and compel 
a popular vote on its adoption. An initiative is put into motion by a petition. Upon receipt 
of a valid petition signed by at least thirty (30) eligible voters, the chairman of the Business 
Committee shall call and conduct a special meeting of the Peoria Council within sixty (60) 
days of receipt of the petition. The Peoria Council shall determine such issues and 
questions as contained in the petition. To adopt such a measure, at least two-thirds (2/3) 
majority of the eligible voters present would be required. Voting will be conducted by 
secret balloting in accordance with the Election Ordinance.

(a) 

(b) 

In the event that the chairman of the Business Committee does not call 
a meeting of the Peoria Council within the specified sixty (60) days, 
the Peoria Council member representing the petitioners is hereby 
authorized to call and conduct such a meeting.

The decision of the Peoria Council shall be binding on the Business 
Committee and the Tribe, and shall remain in force until amended or 
rescinded by subsequent action of the Peoria Council, except as it may 
expire by its own terms.

Section 2. Referendum. At the discretion of the Business Committee, any matter within 
its authority may be referred to the Peoria Council for its decision at a publicized, special 
meeting of the Council. To adopt such a measure, at least two-thirds (2/3) majority of the 
eligible voters present would be required. Voting will be by secret balloting. If the 
proposed measure is adopted, it shall be binding on the Peoria Tribe and the Business 
Committee and shall remain in force until amended or rescinded by subsequent initiative 
or referendum action, except as it may expire by its own terms.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this Constitution shall, in the future, be declared invalid by a court of 
competent jurisdiction, the invalid proviso or provisions shall be severed and the 
remaining provisions shall continue in full force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. 

Peoria Council

(a) 

(b) 

Annual meetings of the Peoria Council shall be held on the first 
Saturday of March for the purpose of receiving reports and 
transacting any other business which may come regularly before the 
Peoria Council.

Special meetings of the Peoria Council may be called at the discretion 
of the Chief, or shall be called by the Chief upon the written request 
of the majority of the Business Committee or when otherwise required 
by the Constitution.

The principal object of the special meeting must be stated in the call 
for same and may include the words "and for the transaction of other 

business that may be presented." Unless these words are added, no 
other business can be transacted except for the object stared in the call.

(c) 

Actions of the Peoria Council shall be final and binding at any duly 
called meeting.

Section 2. 

Business Committee.

(a) 

(b) 

Regular meetings of the Business Committee shall be held the first 
Tuesday of each month, unless otherwise provided for by resolution.

Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called by the 
Chief at his discretion, or shall be called by the Chief upon the written 
request of four (4) members of the Business Committee.

Section 3. All meetings of the Peoria Council, Business Committee, and Grievance 
Committee shall be held at any Tribal facility or other designated location. Special 
meetings as described in this Article shall require a ten (10) day public notice in a 
newspaper of general circulation within the Tribal Office area.

Section 4. 
as referenced in Section 3 of Article XIV.

Peoria Council members shall be notified of special Peoria Council meetings, 

All meetings of the Business Committee and Peoria Council shall be 
Section 5. 
conducted in accordance with "Robert's Rules of Order" except as otherwise provided for 
in the Business Committee or Peoria Council's rules of procedures.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - QUORUM

 
 Section 1. 
duly called Business Committee Meeting.

Five (5) members of the Business Committee shall constitute a quorum at any 

Section 2. Twenty-five (25) members of the Peoria Council shall constitute a quorum to 
transact business at any duly called Peoria Council Meeting.

Section 3. Four (4) members of the Grievance Committee shall constitute a quorum at 
any duly called Grievance Committee Meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - TRIBAL COURT

 
 Section 1. Until such time as the Peoria Council determines that the Tribe is financially 
and otherwise prepared to maintain a separate Tribal Court, the judicial authority of the 
Tribe shall be exercised by the Court of Indian Offenses. The jurisdiction of the Court of 
Indian Offenses shall include, but not be limited to, criminal and civil jurisdiction.

Section 2.  When the Peoria Council determines that the Tribe is prepared to begin 
exercising its judicial authority, it shall notify the Court of Indian Offenses by resolution, 
transmitting the following:

(a) 

a copy of Judicial Ordinance,

(b) 

a plan for establishing the Tribal Court, and

(c) 

a timetable and procedures for orderly transition of pending cases.

In line with the above provisions, the judicial authority of the Tribe will, thereafter, be 
exercised by the Tribal Court. If, because of financial or other reasons, it is not appropriate 
for the Tribe to continue to maintain a separate Tribal Court, the Peoria Council may 
restore jurisdiction to the Court of Indian Offenses.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - SAVINGS CLAUSS

 
 All legislation enacted under any previous Constitutions shall remain in force to the extent 
that those enactments are consistent with this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - CIVIL RIGHTS

 
 The Peoria Tribe, in exercising its powers of self-government, shall not take any action 
which is in violation of the laws of the United States as the same shall exist from time to 
time respecting civil rights and civil liberties of persons. This article shall not abridge the 
concept of self-government or the obligations of the members of the Peoria Tribe to abide 
by this constitution and the ordinances, resolutions and other legally instituted actions of 
the Peoria Tribe. The protections guaranteed by the Indian Civil Rights Act of 1968 (82 
Stat. 77), as amended, shall apply to all members of the Peoria Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the Business 
Committee or by petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of the adult members of the Tribe, 
and if approved by the Secretary of the Interior, shall be submitted to a referendum vote 
of the qualified voters of the Tribe pursuant to the regulations of the Secretary of the 
Interior and shall be effective when ratified by a majority vote of those voting in the 
election.
 
 

ARTICLE XX - RATIFICATION

 
 This Constitution shall be effective when approved by the Secretary of the Interior and 
ratified by a majority vote of the adult members of the Peoria Tribe voting at an election 
called by the Secretary of the Interior under regulations which he may prescribe pursuant 
to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1935; provided that at least 
thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters vote in such election.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs 
on March 31, 1997, the foregoing Constitution of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma 
was submitted to the registered voters of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma and on 
July 23, 1997, was duly adopted by a vote of 226 for, and 7 against, and 
8_cast ballots found spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent 
(30%) of the 343 members registered to vote cast their ballots in accordance with the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

Chairman Election Board

Election Board Member

Election Board Member

Date:

July 23, 1997
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, Deborah J. Maddox, Acting, Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue 

of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act 
of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967) and delegated to me by Secretarial Order No. 3150 as 
extended by Secretarial Order No. 3177, Amendment No. 2, do hereby approve the 
Constitution of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma. This Constitution is effective as 
of this date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any 
action under this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.

Date: AUG 13 1997

