 
  
 CONSTITUTION  
 
OF THE PEORIA TRIBE 
OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Peoria Indians of Oklahoma, initially organized under a constitution 
and bylaws ratified by the voters on October 10, 1939, pursuant to the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), desiring to 
resume our political relationship with the Federal Government in line with 
the Act of May 15, 1978 (92 Stat. 246), do hereby ratify this constitution 
under authority of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act.
 
 

ARTICLE I - NAME

 
 The name of this organization shall be the Peoria Tribe of Indians of 
Oklahoma.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP OF TRIBE

 
 Section 1. The membership of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma shall 
consist of the following persons:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll of the tribe dated January 1, 1937, and/or on the official 
membership roll of the tribe as of August 3, 1956.

(b)  All children born since the date of the said rolls both of whose 
parents are members of the tribe.

(c)  Any child who has been or may be born to a member of the Peoria 
Tribe and a member of any other Indian tribe and who chooses to 
affiliate with the Peoria Tribe provided such child is not a member of 
any other Federally recognized tribe.

(d)  Any child born to a member of the Peoria Tribe and any other 
person, if such child is admitted to membership by the Peoria Council.

Sec. 2. The Peoria Council shall have power to prescribe rules and 
regulations covering future membership including adoptions and loss of 
membership not inconsistent with this constitution and subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE III - PEORIA COUNCIL

 
 The Peoria Council shall consist of all tribal members who are at least 
eighteen (18) years of age and shall exercise those powers delegated to it by 
this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - OFFICERS

 
 The officers of the tribe shall consist of a five (5) member business 
committee as described in Article V and a five (5) member grievance 
committee as described in Article VII Section 1. The officers of the tribe 
shall be elected through secret balloting at an open meeting of the Peoria 
Council by a majority of the membership present.
 
 

ARTICLE V - BUSINESS COMMITTEE

 
 There shall be a business committee which shall consist of the Chief, Second 
Chief, Secretary-Treasurer, and two (2) Councilmen.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - ENROLLMENT COMMITTEE

 
 The enrollment committee shall consist of three (3) persons selected by the 
business committee to certify the qualifications of prospective new 
enrollees of the tribe under procedures consistent with this constitution. 
Such prospective enrollees will be admitted to membership by the Peoria 
Council at each annual meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - GRIEVANCE COMMITTEE

 
 Section 1. The grievance committee shall consist of five (5) members who 
shall be elected by the Peoria Council and who shall not be members of the 
business committee. This committee shall choose, from within its member
ship, a chairman and a secretary. The term of office shall be for four (4) 
years except as provided for in the initial election pursuant to Article IX 
Section 1.

Sec. 2. Meetings of the grievance committee may be called by the chairman 
and shall be called if a written request is received bearing the signature of 
at least three (3) members of the committee or if a petition is received 
signed by at least thirty (30) members of the Peoria Council.

Sec. 3. The grievance committee shall have the responsibility to decide 
disputes, by a majority vote of at least three (3) members, arising under any 
provision of this constitution. The decision of the grievance committee is 
final.

Sec. 4. The grievance committee shall have the responsibility to determine 
disputes, by a vote of at least three (3) members regarding any business 
conducted by the business committee. The decision of the grievance 
committee shall be brought before the Peoria Council at a special meeting 
called for the purpose of settling this dispute. The decision of the Peoria 
Council shall be final.

Sec. 5. The grievance committee shall be charged with the responsibility of 
insuring that the individual rights of members of the tribe, which have been 
guaranteed by the Act of April 11, 1968, P. L. 90-284, 82 Stat. 77 (1968), 
commonly referred to as the Indian Civil Rights Act, are not violated. When 
the grievance committee receives a complaint of a rights violation, it will 
conduct a hearing with all parties present. If, by a vote of at least three (3) 
members, the committee determines that the evidence presented is suffi
cient to substantiate the complaint, the committee shall call a special 
meeting of the Peoria Council to act upon the complaint. The decision of 
the Peoria Council is final.

Sec. 6. If, within twenty (20) days after receipt of a valid petition, a 
meeting of the grievance committee has not been duly conducted with at 
least three (3) members of the committee present, the designated spokes
man for the petitioners shall be authorized to call and conduct a special 
meeting of the Peoria Council. The Peoria Council shall act on the 
complaint contained in the petition and its decision shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POWERS

 
 Section 1. The Business Committee. Except as otherwise provided in this 
constitution, the business committee shall have power to appoint subor
dinate committees and representatives, to transact business, enact ordin
ances and resolutions, and otherwise speak and act on behalf of the Peoria 
Tribe of Oklahoma in all matters on which the tribe is empowered to act 
now or in the future, including the employment of legal counsel. However, 
the choice of counsel and fixing of fees shall be subject to approval by the 
Secretary of the Interior. The exercise of the above powers shall be subject 
to any limitations imposed by Federal Law or the Constitution of the United 
States.

Sec. 2. The Peoria Council shall exercise those powers delegated to it by 
this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. First Election. The first regular election of officers under this 
constitution shall take place within one hundred-twenty (120) days following 
the effective date of this constitution and bylaws at which time a system of 
staggered terms shall be established. At this election, the chief and two (2) 
members of the grievance committee shall be elected for a term of four (4) 
years; the second chief, the second council member and two (2) members of 

the grievance committee shall be elected for a term of three (3) years; and 
the secretary-treasurer, the first council member, and one (1) member of 
the grievance committee shall be elected for a term of two (2) years. 
Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for four (4) years and elections shall 
be held on the first Saturday of March as required when such terms expire. 
Officials of the business committee and the grievance committee shall hold 
office until their successors are duly elected and installed.

Sec. 2. Election Committee. At least sixty (60) days before- the regular 
election, the business committee shall appoint at least four (4) responsible 
adults of the Peoria Council to serve on the election committee. The 
election committee shall be solely responsible for calling and conducting the 
regular election of officers and any other tribal elections which may be 
necessary throughout the year. No elective tribal official or candidate, shall 
serve on the election committee.

Sec. 3. Voter Eligibility. Any member of the Peoria Tribe shall be eligible 
to vote, provided the member is eighteen (18) years of age or over on the 
date of the election.

Sec. 4. Qualifications of Candidates. Any member of the Peoria Tribe who 
is at least twenty-five (25) years of age on the date of the election and 
physically resides in Oklahoma or the following counties of Kansas or 
Missouri: Cherokee, Labette, and Montgomery counties of Kansas: Jasper, 
Newton, and McDonald counties of Missouri: and who has not been convicted 
of a felony in a court of competent jurisdiction within the five (5) years 
immediately prior to the subject election shall qualify as a candidate for 
membership on the business committee and grievance committee.

Sec. 5. Nominations. Nominations for the business committee and the 
grievance committee shall be made from the floor at a general council 
meeting held solely for that purpose at least thirty (30) days prior to the 
election.

Sec. 6. Election Ordinance. All tribal elections, including the first one 
under this constitution, shall be conducted in accordance with an election 
ordinance enacted by the business committee consistent with this consti
tution and bylaws. Such ordinance shall provide for secret balloting, 
majority election, tie votes, absentee balloting and a procedure for handling 
protests and resolving election disputes. Provisions shall also be included 
regarding the conduct of recall, referendum and initiative elections and a 
uniform procedure for submitting and validating petitions.

Elections to amend this constitution shall be conducted pursuant to Article 
XVII of this constitution.

Sec. 7. Installation of Officers. All duly elected officials of the Peoria 
Tribe shall assume office immediately upon their election.
 
 

ARTICLE X - VACANCIES

 
 Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled at any regular or special 
meeting of the Peoria Council through the election procedures established in 
Article IX Sec. 6.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - REMOVAL, RECALL AND FORFEITURE

 
 Section 1. Removal. Each elected or appointive body of the Peoria Tribe 
shall have the power to remove any of its members for cause by affirmative 
vote of a majority of the total membership of the elected or appointive 
body. The business committee shall adopt a resolution providing for such 
removal. The procedures set out in the resolution shall be used in removal 
proceedings by each of the elected or appointive bodies. Included in the 
resolution shall be procedures for the accused to confront his/her accusers 
and speak on his/her behalf in answer to a written statement of the charges 
at a special meeting of the affected body called for that purpose. The 
accused shall be provided with the written statement of charges at least 
fifteen (15) days prior to the removal meeting. Such resolution shall further 
provide that only one (1) person from any governmental body of the tribe 
shall be considered for removal at any meeting called for that purpose. 
Should the process result in removal, no further removal shall be considered 
until the resulting vacancy has been filled. Any tribal member who has 
knowledge of wrongdoing by a tribal official may file such charges with the 
appropriate body.

In the event either the accused or the accuser requests an investigation into 
the matter, it shall be the duty of the grievance committee to conduct such 
investigation and within twenty (20) days provide its findings to the affected 
body for its use in making a final determination.

In the event an official is accused of misfeasance or malfeasance in office 
and the respective body refuses to invoke the removal process, such charges 
may be submitted in writing to the grievance committee. Upon its receipt 
of written charges, it shall be the duty of the grievance committee to 
determine whether such charges have sufficient substance to warrant 
serious consideration. If so, the grievance committee shall conduct a 
hearing within thirty (30) days of its receipt of the written charges.

The same advance notification and rights of the accused apply as set forth 
in this section. If the accused refuses to attend such hearing, it may be 
grounds for forfeiture of his office. If the accuser fails to attend, the 
charges may be dismissed. The grievance committee shall decide whether 
the accused shall be cleared of the charges or removed from office.

In the event a member of the grievance committee is the subject of removal 
action, the business committee shall be responsible for conducting the 
procedures stipulated above.

Sec. 2. Recall. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by at least thirty 
percent (30%) of the Peoria Council, the grievance committee shall call and 
conduct within sixty (60) days an election for the purpose of recall of a 
tribal official holding elective office. The election shall be conducted 
pursuant to the election ordinance. Once an individual is subjected to recall 
proceedings, he/she shall not again be subject to such action during the 
balance of his/her term. 

.

Sec. 3. Forfeiture. The affected governmental body shall immediately 
declare vacant any position within itself and promptly fill such vacancy in 
the manner provided in Article X when it is determined that the incumbent:

a.  Has died;

b.  Has resigned;

c.  Has been convicted of a felony while in office;

d.  Has been convicted while in office of a crime involving dishonesty;

e.  Has been absent without being excused by the respective body for 
more than three (3) consecutive meetings;

f.  Has ceased to physically reside in the locations enumerated in 
Article IX, Sec. 4.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. Initiative is the procedure whereby the members of the Peoria 
Council may exercise their right to present to the business committee 
p. oposed legislation and compel a popular vote on its adoption. An initiative 
is put into motion by a petition. Upon receipt of a valid petition signed by 
at least thirty (30) eligible voters, the chairman of the business committee 
shall call and conduct a special meeting of the Peoria Council within sixty 
(60) days of receipt of the petition. The Peoria Council shall determine such 
issues and questions as contained in the petition. A majority of those voting 
shall be required to adopt such a measure, provided that at least two-thirds 
(2/3) of the eligible voters in attendance participate in the initiative 
election. Voting will be conducted by secret balloting.

a. 
In the event that the chairman of the business committee does not 
call a meeting of the Peoria Council within the specified sixty (60) 
days, the spokesman for the petitioners is hereby authorized to call 
and conduct such a meeting.

b.  The decision of the Peoria Council shall be binding on the business 
committee and the tribe and shall remain in force until amended or 
rescinded by subsequent action of the Peoria Council, except as it may 
expire by its own terms.

Sec. 2. Referendum. At the discretion of the business committee, any 
matter within its authority may be referred to the Peoria Council for its 
decision at a special meeting of the Council. A majority of those voting 
shall be required to adopt such measure, provided at least two-thirds (2/3) of 
the eligible voters in attendance participate in the referendum election. 
Voting will be by secret balloting. If the proposed measure is adopted, it 
shall be binding on the Peoria Tribe and the business committee and shall 
remain in force until amended or rescinded by subsequent initiative or 
referendum action except as it may expire by its own terms.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII  - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this constitution shall in the future, be declared invalid 
by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or provisions shall 
be severed and the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and 
effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - DUTIES OF OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chief. It shall be the duty of the chief to preside at all meetings 
and perform all duties appertaining to the office, also to act as chairman of 
the business committee.

Sec. 2. Second Chief. In the absence of the chief, or during procedure to 
remove him/her, the second chief shall perform the duties of the chief. In 
case of vacancy, the second chief shall succeed at once to the office of the 
chief until the next special or regular election for the office of chief.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer. The duties of the Secretary-Treasurer shall 
include:

a.  Correctly recording the proceedings of all meetings;

b.  Making out the order of business for the Chief;

c.  Notifying all committee members of their appointments;

d.  Retaining in his/her custody all records and papers of the Peoria 
Council;

e.  Providing for inspection of the records and papers of the Peoria 
Council in his/her possession upon request of any member of the 
Peoria Council, provided that such inspection take place within the 
Secretary-Treasurer's presence;

f.  Keeping a correct list of all members of the Peoria Council;

g.  Authenticating all accounts or orders of the Peoria Council;

In the absence of the chief and second chief, calling meetings to 

h. 
order and presiding over the selection of a chairman pro tem;

Issuing notices of all meetings and conducting all genera! corre
i. 
spondence when directed to do so by the Peoria Council or Business 
Committee;

j.  Receiving all monies of the Peoria Council and keeping an accurate 
account of receipts and disbursement;

k.  Rendering a written report at the annual meeting;

1.  Keeping all tribal monies entrusted to his/her care in a special 
account and disbursing such funds as may be directed by the Business 
Committee or the Peoria Council therefrom by check;

m.  Acquiring a bond to ensure proper performance of his/her duties, 
the cost of such bond will be paid out of tribal monies.

All records and papers compiled, written by or entrusted to the Secretary- 
Treasurer shall remain the property of the Peoria Tribe and upon expiration 
of his/her term of office, all such records and papers in his/her possession 
shall be turned over to his/her successor.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. Annual meetings of the Peoria Council shall be held on the first 
Saturday of March for the purpose of receiving reports and transacting any 
other business which may come regularly before the Peoria Council.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Peoria Council may be called at the 
discretion of the chief, and shall be called by him/her upon the written 
request of the majority of the business committee or when otherwise 
required by the constitution.

Sec 3. The principal object of the special meeting must be stated in the call 
for same and may include the words "and for the transaction of other 
business that may be presented". Unless these words are added, no other 
business can be transacted except for the object stated in the call.

Sec. 4. Unless otherwise provided by resolution, the regular meetings of the 
business committee shall be held the last Saturday of each month.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the business committee may be called by the 
chief at his discretion, and shall be called by him/her upon the written 
request of three (3) members of the business committee.

Sec. 6. All meetings of the Peoria Council, business committee, and 
grievance committee shall be held within the area of residency described in 
Article IX, Sec. 4 of the constitution. Meetings as described in this Article 
shall require a ten (10) day public notice in a newspaper of general 
circulation within such area.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI- QUORUM

 
 Section 1. Three (3) members of the business committee shall constitute a 
quorum at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Twenty five (25) members of the Peoria Council shall constitute a 
quorum to transact business.

Sec. 3. Three (3) members of the grievance committee shall constitute a 
quorum at any meeting.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Amendments to this constitution may be proposed by a majority vote of the 
business committee or by a petition signed by thirty per cent (30%) of the 
adult members of the tribe, and if approved by the Secretary of the Interior, 
shall be submitted to a referendum vote of the qualified voters of the tribe 
pursuant to the regulations of the Secretary and shall be effective when 
ratified by a majority vote of those voting in the election.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - RATIFICATION

 
 This constitution shall be effective when approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the adult members of the Peoria 
Tribe voting at an election called by the Secretary of the Interior under 
regulations which he may prescribe pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma 
Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936; provided, that at least twenty per cent 
(20%) of the qualified voters vote in such election.
 
 

APPROVAL
 
 I, William Hallett, Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by

virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of

June 26, 1936, (49 Stat. 1967), as amended, and delegated to me by

230 D.M. 1.1, do hereby approve the Constitution of the Peoria Tribe of 

Indians of Oklahoma; provided, that nothing in this approval shall be 

construed as authorizing any action under the constitution that would be 

contrary to Federal Law.

Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D.C.

MAY 29 1980

Date:
 
 

 
CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved by William Hallett Commissioner

of Indian Affairs on MAY 29 1980 the foregoing Constitution of the Peoria 

Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma was submitted for ratification to the adult

members of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma and was on 7/30/81,

duly ratified by a vote of 651 for, and 27 against,

in an election in which at least twenty percent (20%) of the 1,134

entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with an election called

for that purpose.

Date: 

July 30, 1981
 
 

 
 
 