 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS 
 OF OKLAHOMA


 
  
  
 RATIFIED OCTOBER 10, 1939 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1940 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE PEORIA TRIBE 
OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE


We, the Peoria Indians of Oklahoma, in order to take advantage of 
the opportunities of economic independence and social advancement 
offered by the Thomas-Rogers Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 
26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do adopt the following constitution and by
laws pursuant to that Act.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Peoria Tribe of Indians 

of Oklahoma.

Article II—Membership of Tribe

Section 1. The membership of the Peoria Tribe of Indians of Okla

homa shall consist of the following persons:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

census roll of the Tribe as of January 1, 1937.

(b)  All children born since the date of the said roll, both of whose 

parents are members of the Tribe.

(c)  Any child who has been or may be born of a marriage between a 
member of the Peoria Tribe and a member of any other Indian tribe 
and who chooses to affiliate with the Peoria Tribe.

(d)  Any child born of a marriage between a member of the Peoria 
Tribe and any other person, if such child is admitted to membership 
by the Council of the Peoria Tribe.

Sec. 2. The Council shall have power to prescribe rules and regula
tions, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, cover
ing future membership including adoptions and the loss of/ 
membership.

Article III—Membership of Council

The supreme governing body of the Tribe shall be the Peoria Coun
cil. The membership of the Peoria Council shall be all the Peoria 
Indians residing in Oklahoma; 21 years of age and over.

Article IV—Officers

The officers of the Tribe shall be the Chief, Second Chief, Secretary
Treasurer, and two Councilmen, who shall be elected at an open coun
cil meeting by a majority vote of the membership present.

Article V—Committees

Section 1. There shall be a Business Committee which shall consist 
of the officers and councilmen as provided in Article IV. The Business
 
 

 
 
 Committee shall have power to appoint subordinate committees and 
representatives, to transact business and otherwise speak or act on be
half of the Tribe in all matters on which the Tribe is empowered to 
act. The powers of the Tribe shall be set forth in detail in the cor
porate charter to be requested by the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Grievance Committee.—This Committee shall consist of three 
members who shall be elected by the membership of the council and 
shall not include any members of the Business Committee. The term 
of office shall be for two years.

Article VI—Elections

Section 1. Regular elections of officers shall be held by the council 
on the first Tuesday of March 1940, and each fourth year thereafter.
Sec. 2. The term of office shall be for four years or until their suc
cessors are elected and installed, provided that the present officers 
shall serve until the first regular election.

Sec. 3. Nominations shall be made from the floor. Election shall be 
by standing vote or by written ballot, a majority vote being necessary 
to elect. Where there are more than two candidates and no one re
ceives a majority vote the low candidate shall be eliminated and voting 
proceed until one candidate receives a majority of votes cast. The 
newly elected officers shall be installed immediately upon their election.

Article VII—Vacancies

Vacancies in any elective office shall be filled at any regular or special 

meeting of the Peoria Council.

Article VIII—Removal of Officers

The Grievance Committee shall investigate complaints of miscon
duct or other acts of the members of the Business Committee and upon 
a proper showing shall call a special meeting of the Peoria Council to 
act upon such complaints. Such council shall have power, by a major
ity vote, after giving the accused a hearing, to remove him from office 
and proceed to elect a successor.

Article IX—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and the attached By-laws may be 
proposed by a majority vote of the Business Committee or by a peti
tion signed by 30 per cent of the adult members of the Tribe, and if 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior shall be submitted to a 
referendum vote of the members of the Tribe, and shall be effective if 
approved by a majority vote of those voting in the election.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE PEORIA TRIBE OF INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chief.—It shall be the duty of the Chief to preside at all 
meetings and perform all duties appertaining to the office, also to act 
as chairman of the Business Committee.

Sec. 2. Second Chief.—In the absence of the Chief, or during pro
cedure to remove him, the Second Chief shall perform the duties of 

that officer. In case of vacancy, the Second Chief shall succeed at once 
to the office of the Chief until the next special or regular election for 
the office of Chief.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer.—The Secretary-Treasurer shall cor
rectly record the proceedings of all meetings. He shall make out the 
order of the business for the Chief, shall notify all committees of their 
appointments, shall have custody of the records and all papers of the 
Council, which records and papers shall be open to inspection at any 
time, in his presence, by any member of the Council desiring to read 
them. He shall keep a correct list of all members of the council, shall 
authenticate all accounts or orders of the council and, in the absence 
of the Chief and Second Chief, shall call the meeting to order until a 
chairman pro tem is selected. He shall render a written report at the 
annual meeting and at the expiration of his term of office records and 
all papers in his possession shall be turned over to his successor. He 
shall issue notices of all meetings and conduct all general correspond
ence, as directed by the council or the Business Committee. He shall 
receive all moneys of the council and keep an accurate account of re
ceipts and disbursements.

The Secretary-Treasurer shall keep all tribal moneys entrusted to 
his care in a special account and all disbursements therefrom should 
be made by check. At any time that such account shall amount to 
more than $50.00, he shall file a bond satisfactory to the Business Com
mittee and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost of such bond 
shall be paid out of tribal moneys.

Article II—Qualifications of Officers

Any person elected to membership in the Business Committee shall 
be not less than 25 years of age, a member of the Peoria Tribe of 
Indians of Oklahoma and a resident of the Quapaw Indian Agency 
jurisdiction. Any member of the Business Committee removing from 
the State of Oklahoma shall automatically lose his office.

Article III—Meetings

Section 1. Annual meetings of the council shall be held on the first 
Tuesday of March for the purpose of receiving reports and transact
ing any other business which may come regularly before the council.
Sec. 2. Special meetings of the council may be called at the discretion 
of the Chief, and shall be called by him upon the written request of 
the majority of the Business Committee or upon the written request of 
ten members of the Tribe: Provided, That at least ten days’ notice shall 
be given in each instance.

Sec. 3. The principal object of the special meeting must be stated in 
the call for same and may include the words “and for the transaction 
of other business that may be presented.” Unless these words are 
added, no other business can be transacted except for the object stated 
in the call.

Sec. 4. Unless otherwise provided by resolution, the regular meet
ings of the Business Committee shall be held the last Saturday in each 
month.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
by the Chief at his discretion, and shall be called by him upon the 
written request of three members of the Business Committee.

Sec. 6. Unless some other point under the Quapaw Agency jurisdic
tion is designated in the call or notice, all meetings of the council and 
of the Business Committee shall be held at the Quapaw Indian Agency.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Three members of the Business Committee shall con

stitute a quorum at any meeting.

Sec. 2. Twenty-five members of the Peoria Council shall constitute 

a quorum to transact regular business.

Article V—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws shall be effective when approved by 
the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of the 
Indians of the Peoria Tribe voting at an election called by the Secre
tary of the Interior under regulations which he may prescribe pur
suant to section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 
1936: Provided, That at least 20 per cent of the eligible voters vote in 
such election.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 
the Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the 
attached Constitution and By-laws of the Peoria Tribe of Oklahoma.

Washington, D. C., August 16, 1939.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved August 16, 1939 by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Peoria Indian Tribe 
of Oklahoma and was on October 10, 1939 duly accepted by a vote of 
69 for, and none against, in an election in which over 20 per cent of 
those entitled to vote cast their ballots, pursuant to section 3 of the 
Oklahoma Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967).

The Peoria Business Committee, 

By George Sky,
Leo Finley,
Ada Moore Palmer, 
Sherman Staton.

H. A. Andrews,

Superintendent, Quapaw Agency.

By J. A. Phifer,

Deputy Disbursing Agent.

