 
  
 CONSTITUTION

 of the  
 

PICAYUNE RESERVATION

 
 We, the Chukchansi people of the Picayune Reservation, in order to form a tribal organization to handle our 
Tribe’s affairs, improve the economic conditions of ourselves and our posterity, promote our common welfare, 
conserve and develop our land and other resources, encourage educational progress, and secure our powers of 
self-government, do hereby establish this Constitution.
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 The name of this organized body shall be the Picayune Reservation, referred to hereinafter as "the Tribe."
 
 

ARTICLE I  - NAME

ARTICLE II  - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Tribe shall extend to all lands comprising the Picayune Rancheria, as described in the 
Stipulation for Entry of Judgment entered in Hardwick, et al. v. United States, et al., N.D. Cal. No.
C-79-17I0-SW, notwithstanding the issuance of any patent, and to all lands hereafter acquired in any manner by 
the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 SECTION 1.  Membership
(a)  The membership of the Tribe shall consist of:
(1)  All persons who were listed as distributees or dependent members of distributees in the plan for distribution 
of the assets of the Picayune Rancheria, as approved by the Secretary of the Interior on June 30, 1960.
(2)  All persons of Chukchansi Indian blood who have a special relationship with the Tribe not shared by Indians 
in general, and who have received allotments of public land under the General Allotment Act of 1887, 25 USC 
331 et seq., as listed on any official roll of the Bureau of Indian Affairs,.
(3)  Persons who are direct lineal descendants of individuals eligible for membership under either subsection (1) 
or (2), regardless of whether the ancestor through whom eligibility is claimed is living or deceased, providing 
such descendant is of Chukchansi Indian blood.
(4)  All persons of Chukchansi Indian blood who have a special relationship to the Tribe not shared by Indians 
in general, who have been accepted into membership under Section 2 of this Article.
(b)  All applications for membership from any person of Chukchansi Indian blood shall be submitted to the 
Enrollment Committee, which shall rule on the application pursuant to an Enrollment Ordinance adopted by 
the Tribal Council.
(c)  Nothing in this section shall affect property rights existing prior to ratification of this Constitution of any 
member of the Tribe.

SECTION 2.  Petitions for membership
(a)  At any time within one year of the date of ratification of this Constitution, any person of Chukchansi Indian 
blood who believes hcr/himself to be entitled to membership in the Tribe, and who does not fall within the 
provisions of Sections 1(a)(1), (2) or (3) of this Article, may petition the Tribal Council for admission into 
membership. The Tribal Council shall review such petitions and determine whether the petitioner has, has bad, 
or is the descendant of a person of Chukchansi Indian blood who had, a special relationship with the Tribe not 
shared by Indians in general. If the Tribal Council determines that the petitioner is eligible for membership 
under this provision, the petitioner shall be accepted as a tribal member with all rights and responsibilities of 
membership, and her/his name shall be added to the Base Membership Roll.
(b)  The Tribal Council may, in its discretion, extend the time for petitions under this section for up to one 
additional year.

SECTION 3.  Dual Enrollment
No person shall be enrolled as a member of the Tribe if she/he is recognized as a member of any other tribe, 
band, or Indian community.

SECTION 4.  Base Membership Roll
The Base Membership Roll (the Roll) shall be prepared in accordance with an ordinance adopted by the Tribal 
Council. Such ordinance shall contain provisions for establishment of an Enrollment Committee, enrollment 
procedures, including application forms, approval or disapproval of applications, rejection notices, and appeals 
procedures, for corrections to the Roll, and for keeping the Roll current.

SECTION 1.  General Council.
The General Council shall consist of all enrolled members of the Tribe, 18 years of age or older. The General 
Council shall exercise those powers delegated to it by this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 SECTION 2.  Tribal Council.
The Governing Body of the Tribe shall be known as the Tribal Council. The General Council shall elect from 
its own members by secret ballot a Tribal Council consisting of seven members.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE GOVERNING BODY

 
 to purchase in the name of the Tribe any land or other property the Tribal Council may deem beneficial to 

to manage tribal funds in accordance with approved resolutions; .
to collect and expend any tribal funds within the exclusive control of the Tribe, and to recommend the 

to safeguard the peace, safety, morals, and general welfare of the Tribe;
to confer with the Secretary of the Interior or his representative and make recommendations regarding the 

to promulgate and enforce bylaws and ordinances necessary to carry out its powers under this Constitution;
to promulgate and enforce ordinances governing the conduct of the members of the Tribe, and 

to acquire under condemnation proceedings in courts of competent jurisdiction, land or other property,
to administer and regulate the use and disposition of all Tribal property,
to borrow money from any governmental agency, and to pledge or assign future Tribal income as security for 

The Tribal Council shall have the following powers:
(a) 
(b) 
non-members within the Tribe’s jurisdiction;
(c) 
(d) 
uses and disposition of tribal property,
to prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal lands, interest in lands, or other community 
(e) 
assets of the Tribe, provided that no tribal lands shall ever be sold or encumbered except for tribal purposes, or 
leased for a period exceeding five years, except that leases for mining purposes may be made for such longer 
periods as may be authorized by the Tribal Council;
(f) 
the Tribe;
(g) 
(h) 
(i) 
such loans;
(j) 
(k) 
expenditure of any other tribal funds;
(1) 
(m) 
(n) 
doing business within the exterior boundaries of the Picayune Reservation, and to grant special rights or 
privileges to, and otherwise regulate the conduct of business activities within the Picayune Reservation;
(o) 
(p) 
tribal purposes in accordance with a budget approved by the Tribal Council, provided that all expenditures of 
the tribal funds under the control of the Tribal Council shall be made only by resolution, duly approved at 
regular or special meetings of the Tribal Council, and that the amount so expended shall be a matter of record; 
(q) to charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes and to regulate the activities of all cooperative 
associations of members of the Tribe by ordinance;
(r) 
approved by a two-thirds majority of all members of the Tribal Council; 
(s) 
(t) 
reserving the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated powers;
(u) 
(v) 

to manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Tribe;
to promulgate and enforce ordinances providing for taxes, assessments, and license fees upon all persons 

to appoint necessary committees;
to delegate to subordinate boards, or cooperative associations any of the powers enumerated herein, 

to apportion available tribal funds for public purposes;
to administer any funds within the control of the Tribe and to make expenditures of available funds for 

to provide for the protection and preservation of tribal property, wildlife, and natural resources;
to cultivate and preserve native Chukchansi arts, crafts, language, culture, and Indian ceremonials;

to regulate the conduct of business activities within the exterior boundaries of the Picayune Reservation;

to waive the Tribe’s sovereign immunity from unconsented suit, provided, that any such waiver must be 

.

(w) to provide for the establishment of Tribal Courts for all purposes allowed by law, including exercising the 
Tribe’s jurisdiction and protecting the rights and interests of the Tribe’s members under the Indian Child 
Welfare Act, 25 U.S.C.  1918;
(x) to exercise such further powers, consistent with this Constitution, as needed to carry out the powers listed 
herein.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - MEETINGS

 
 SECTION 1. Tribal Council Meetings
Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held on the fourth Monday of each month in a place designated 
by the Tribal Council. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the Chairperson and shall be 
called by her/him upon receipt of a petition signed by at least three Tribal Council members and when so 
called, the Tribal Council shall have the power to transact business as in regular meetings provided that a 
quorum is present. Council members shall be notified at least three days in advance of all special meetings.

SECTION 2. Quorum
A quorum of the Tribal Council shall consist of four members of the Tribal Council. No business shall be 
transacted unless a quorum is present.

SECTION 3. General Council Meetings
Regular meetings of the General Council shall be held quarterly. The date, time, and place shall be determined 
by the Tribal Council. Special meetings of the General Council may be called by the Chairperson of the Tribal 
Council upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 51% of the members of the General Council.

SECTION 4. Quorum - General Council
A quorum of the General Council shall consist of 35% of the General Council. Once a quorum of the General 
Council has been established, a quorum shall consist of those present who may then conduct all business. If a 
quorum is not established, the Chairperson may then move to rescheduled or adjourn the meeting.

SECTION 1. Members of the Tribal Council
Members of the Tribal Council shall be elected pursuant to an appropriate election ordinance, and shall serve 
until their successors are duly installed.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
 SECTION 2. Voter Qualification
AU enrolled members of the Picayune Reservation, who are 18 years of age or older are qualified voters.

SECTION 3. Qualification of Candidates
Candidates for membership on the Tribal Council shall be qualified voters and shall reside within a 75 mile 
radius of the Picayune Reservation.

 SECTION 4. First Election
(a) The officers of the Tribal Council elected under the Constitution of the Picayune Reservation, approved 
March 31, 1987 ( hereinafter "the provisional Tribal Council"), silting at the time of ratification of this 
Constitution, shall hold office until their successors are duly elected and seated. The first regular election of 
officials under this Constitution shall be held on within 30 days after ratification of this Constitution.
(b) At the first election held under this Constitution, the four candidates receiving the highest total of votes 
shall hold office for a period of two years. The first Chairperson, Secretary and Treasurer of the Tribal Council 
shall be elected from these four members. The three candidates receiving the next highest total of votes shall 
be elected for a term of one year. The Vice-Chairperson of the Tribal Council shall be elected from these three 
members. Thereafter, all terms of office shall be for two years.
(c) The date of the annual elections shall be determined by the Tribal Council. Tribal Council members shall 
hold office until their successors are duly elected and installed.

SECTION 5. Nominations
The time, place, and manner of nominations shall be specified in the election ordinance adopted pursuant to 
Section 6 of this Article.

SECTION 6.  Election Ordinances
a)  The Tribal Council shall adopt an Election Ordinance following the effective date of this Constitution. Such 
ordinance shall include but not be limited to the following provisions: secret balloting, nomination of 
candidates, absentee balloting, and procedures for resolving election disputes.
b)  The Election Ordinance shall also include provisions regarding the conduct of recall and referendum 
elections, and a uniform procedure for submitting petitions. Elections to amend this Constitution shall be 
conducted in accordance with Article XII of the Constitution. The governing body is to conduct elections in 
accordance with the Election Ordinance.

SECTION 7.  Settlement of Election Disputes
All election disputes, including the determination of the qualifications of any voter or any candidate, if 
questioned, will be resolved by an Election Committee established under the Election Ordinance.

Section 1.  Election
The Tribal Council shall elect from its membership a Chairperson, a Vice-Chairperson, a Secretary and a 
Treasurer.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - OFFICERS

 
 Section 2.  Duties of Officers
The duties of the officers of the Tribal Council shall be enumerated in bylaws adopted by the Tribal Council at 
its first regular meeting after taking office.

Section 3.  Qualifications
Officers of the Tribal Council shall:
(a)  be 25 years of age or older;
(b)  reside within a 75 mile radius of the Reservation.
(c)  have attended at least eight Tribal Council meetings within the past year and have demonstrated an active 
involvement in Chukchansi affairs.

Any office which has been vacated, whether by removal, recall, or forfeiture, shall be filled by appointment of 
the Tribal Council at its next meeting and such replacement shall serve the unexpired term of office.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - VACANCIES

ARTICLE X  - REMOVAL, RECALL, FORFEITURE

 
 SECTION 1.  Removal
The Tribal Council may, by a majority vote, remove any member of the Tribal Council for neglect of duty or 
gross misconduct. Any Tribal Council member subject to removal shall be given due notice and an opportunity 
to be heard, and shall receive a written statement of charges against her/him at least 30 days before the meeting 
at which the removal will be voted upon.

SECTION 2. Recall
Within 10 days of receipt of a petition signed by at least 51% of the qualified voters demanding the recall of any 
member(s) of the Tribal Council, the Tribal Chairperson shall call a special election on the question of the 
recall. The special election shall be held within 30 days from the date of the publication of the notice of the 
election. The election shall be held in the manner prescribed in the Tribe's Election Ordinance in accordance 
with Article VII, Section 6 of this Constitution. The decision of a majority of the voters voting in the recall 
election shall be final, provided that at least 30% of the qualified voters voted in the election.

SECTION 3.  Forfeiture
Any member of the Tribal Council, or other tribal official who, during the term for which she/he is elected or 
appointed, is convicted of a felony in any federal or State court shall automatically forfeit her/his office effective 
on the date of her/his initial conviction in court. Any official found guilty by the Tribal Council of behavior 
involving misconduct reflecting on the dignity and integrity of the Tribal Council, malfeasance in office, or gross 
neglect of duty, shall be removed from office by a majority vote of the Tribal Council, in accord with Section 1 
of this Article. Any member who shall absent himself from three successive meetings without being excused for 
cause, shall forfeit all rights of his office.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - REFERENDUM
 
 Upon presentation to (he Tribal Council of a petition signed by 30% of the qualified voters, the Tribal Council 
shall either: (1) adopt the provision(s) of the petition by ordinance, resolution or other appropriate action; or 
(2) call an election at which the issue(s) presented by the petition may be voted on within 60 days, by secret 
ballot. The Tribal Council shall abide by the vote of the majority of the voters in any such election, provided 
that at least 51% of the qualified voters have voted.

SECTION 1.
All members of the Tribe shall enjoy without hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, 
assembly, and association.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 SECTION 2.
This Constitution shall not in any way alter, abridge or otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the 
members of the Tribe as citizens of the State of California or the United States.

SECTION 3.
Individual property rights of any member of the Tribe, vested prior to the adoption of this Constitution, shall 
not be altered, abridged, or otherwise affected by the provisions of this Constitution.

SECTION 4.
Tribal members shall have the right to review all tribal records, including financial records, at any reasonable 
time in accordance with procedures established by the Tribal Council.

SECTION 5.
The Tribe, in exercising its powers of self-government, shall not:
(a) make or enforce any law prohibiting the full exercise of religion, or abridging the freedom of speech or of 
the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble and to petition for a redress of grievances;
(b) violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and affects against unreasonable 
search and seizure, nor issue warrants, but upon probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and 
particularly describing the place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;
(c) subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;
(d) compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;
(e) take any private property for a public use without just compensation;
(f) deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to speedy trial, to be informed of the nature and cause 
of the accusation, to be confronted with their witnesses in favor, and, at his own expense to have the assistance 
of counsel for his defense;
(g) require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual punishments, and in no event impose 
for conviction of any one offense any penalty or punishment greater than imprisonment for a term of 6 months 
or a fine of $500 or both;
(b) deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or deprive any person of liberty or 
property without due process of laws;
(i) pass any bill of attainer or ex post facto law;
(j) deny to any person threatened with imprisonment the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than 6 
persons.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - AMENDMENTS
 
 This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Tribe voting at an election 
called for that purpose, provided that at least 35% of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election. It shall be 
the duty of the Tribal Council to call an election on a proposed amendment upon presentation of a petition 
signed by 30% of the eligible voters. No elections to amend this Constitution may be called except as provided 
herein.

If any provision of this constitution shall in the future be declared invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, 
the invalid provision or provisions shall be severed and the remaining provisions shall continue in full force and 
effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SEVERABILITY

 
 This Constitution shall be effective when ratified by a majority of the voters eligible to vote thereon, as 
determined by the provisional Tribal Council described in Article VII, Section 4, in a special election called by 
the provisional Tribal Council for that purpose.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV  - RATIFICATION

CERTIFICATE OF COUNTY CLERK TO RESULT OF THE 
 
 ELECTION HELD ON OCTOBER 22nd REGARDING THE 
 
 
CONSTITUTION OF THE PICAYUNE RESERVATION

 
 I, JUANITA PRICE, County Clerk of the County of Madera 

do hereby certify that I was present to open the votes cast 

in the above election on the adoption of the Constitution 

for the Picayune Reservation and that there were 12 YES 

votes and no votes in opposition.

WITNESS my hand and Official Seal this 7th day of

November, 1988. 

*

