 
  
 CONSTITUTION  
 
OF 
THE PINOLEVILLE POMO NATION

PREAMBLE

 
 We the Porno People of the Pinoleville Pomo Nation, pursuant to our inherent and 
historic sovereignty, in order to form a more perfect government, establish justice, 
ensure tranquility, promote culture, traditions, education, and language, advance the 
general welfare, secure the blessings of liberty, exercise dominion over the Territory, 
provide for the common defense, and secure our rights, powers, and privileges, do 
ordain and establish this Constitution for the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. 

Territory

The Territory of the Tribe shall include all lands within the original boundaries of 
the Pinoleville Reservation, any lands held by the United States for the benefit of 
the Tribe or the Pinoleville people, historical lands, fee lands, water and natural 
resources as may be here after acquired by the Tribe, whether within or without 
said boundary lines, under any grant, transfer, purchase, adjudication, treaty, 
Executive Order, Act of Congress or other acquisition, notwithstanding the 
issuance of any private property interest including patents or rights-of-way. The 
Territory shall include all surface and subsurface, submerged land under 
navigable or non-navigable waters, all air and water, and all natural resources.

Section 2. 

Jurisdiction

To the fullest extent permitted by Federal Law, the Jurisdiction of the Tribe shall 
extend to all persons, subjects, property, and activities within the historical lands, 
fee lands, water and natural resources as may be here after acquired by the Tribe. 
Any person who enters the Territory shall, by entering, be deemed to have 
consented to the Jurisdiction of the Tribe.

Section 3. 

Supremacy of the Constitution

This Constitution shall be the “Supreme Law” over all Territory and persons 
within the Jurisdiction of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE II - TRIBAL CITIZENSHIP

 
 Section 1. 

Citizenship and Naturalization Code

The Tribal Council shall adopt a Citizenship and Naturalization Code within one 
(1) year after the ratification of this Constitution.

Section 2. 

Citizenship Requirements.

A. 

A person who has at least one-quarter (1/4) degree of Pomo Indian blood, 
and who is related by blood to a member of the base roll. The base roll 
consists of the Captains and Councilmen listed on the Mendocino County 
Indenture, dated 1878, 1893, and 1897, for the purchase of land for 
Pinoleville Indians: Charley, Sam Hale, Napoleon Bonaparte, Jim Reeve, 
Fuller Williams, Jack Mace, and John Stevenson. (Burden of proof is on 
the applicant).

B. 

Naturalization: One-quarter (1/4) degree of Native American Indian blood 
and has close social ties to the Pinoleville Indian Reservation. (Burden of 
proof is on the applicant).

a. The Tribe will not accept an application from a person enrolled in 
another tribe; nor can any person be enrolled that owns land within the 
jurisdiction of another tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE III - GOVERNING BODY-TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. 

Tribal Council

The governing body of this Tribe shall be the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council 
shall consist of seven (7) members elected from the general citizenship of this 
Tribe, including four (4) officers: Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary, 
Treasurer and three (3) members-at-large.

Section 2. 

Qualifications

A. 

B. 

The Tribal Council members shall be registered voters of the Pinoleville 
Pomo Nation.

Be at least eighteen years old and be of 1/4 degree Native American 
Indian blood.

Section 3.  Tribal Council Powers

A. 

Tribal Chairperson:

The Chairperson shall have the power to represent the Tribe in all matters 
with any other governments. The Chairperson shall negotiate any treaty, 
compact, or contract subject to ratification by the Tribal Council. She/he 
shall have supervision over the Tribal Council and Committees. When 
the Tribal Council is not in session, the Chairperson shall serve as the 
official spokesperson of this Tribe.

B. 

Tribal Vice Chairperson:

The Vice Chairperson shall assist the Chairperson when called upon by 
the Chairperson. In the absence of the Chairperson, he/she shall preside, 
and when so presiding, shall have all rights, privileges, duties and 
responsibilities of the Chairperson.

C. 

Tribal Secretary:

The Tribal Secretary shall keep the minutes of all meetings and shall 
attest to the enactment of all Minutes, Resolutions, Ordinances and 
Codes.

D. 

Tribal Treasurer:

The Tribal Treasurer shall carry out, or cause to be carried out, financial 
reports to the Tribal Council. Any elected or appointed Tribal Council 
person may be designated and authorized by the Tribal Council to sign 
checks on behalf of this Tribe. All checks must be executed by at least 
two of the authorized signatories.

E. 

Tribal Council Members:

The Tribal Council shall have three (3) members-at-large. Their duties 
shall be to assist the Tribal Council in all duties, attend all duly called 
meetings, serving on designated committees, and attending trainings that 
directly benefit the tribal government.

Section 4. 

Compensation

The Tribal Council shall be paid reasonable compensation as established by 
Tribal Law.

ARTICLE IV - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL OF THE P1NOLEVILLE
 
 
INDIAN RESERVATION

 
 Section 1. Enumerated Powers

The Tribal Council shall have powers and responsibilities hereinafter provided 
through its inherent sovereignty and as recognized by Federal law:

(a)  To consult, negotiate, contract or compact with federal, state and local 

governments on activities, which may affect this Tribe;

(b)  To employ legal counsel;

(c)  To receive advice from and make recommendations to the Secretary of the 
Interior with regard to all appropriations estimates for all projects which 
will benefit the citizens of this Tribe prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Office of Management and Budget and Congress;

(d)  To manage, lease or otherwise operate all unassigned Tribal property and 

to regulate the use of, and development on assigned Tribal lands;

(e)  To acquire property and to accept gifts for this Tribe;
 
 

I

 
 (f)  To establish corporations and businesses, to charter and regulate 
corporations, joint ventures, cooperatives, associations, special districts, 
housing authorities, educational and charitable institutions, political 
subdivisions and other entities;

(g)  To prescribe codes and regulations regarding future citizenship, loss of 

citizenship and naturalization of citizens;

(h)  To establish business codes to approve contracts with public or private 

enterprises, businesses, or corporations on behalf of the Tribe, and to 
borrow money from public and private sources that will promote the 
economic well-being of the Tribe and its citizens;

(i)  To promulgate and enforce such codes, ordinances and regulations as are 
deemed necessary to safeguard and promote the peace, safety, health and 
general welfare for the citizens of the Pinoleville Reservation;

(j)  To promulgate and enforce codes and ordinances to assure the complete 
jurisdiction available to the Tribe pursuant to the Indian Child Welfare Act 
of 1978, (25 U.S.C. Section 1918);

(k)  To levy taxes and fees, on all persons, property and business activities;

(l)  To have the authority to establish a judiciary;

(m) To condemn property for public purposes so long as just compensation is 
paid, provided, that all condemnation proceedings are conducted in 
accordance with applicable law;

(n)  To enact codes and ordinances providing for the exclusion of any person 
whose activities jeopardize the peace and safety of the members of the 
tribe, tribal operations, or tribal businesses, and to pass laws governing the 
conditions under which members and non-members may enter and remain 
within the territory of the tribe;

(o)  To regulate the domestic relations of all citizens of the Tribe wherever 

they are located and all persons within Tribal jurisdiction; and

(p)  To regulate the inheritance of all lands within Tribal jurisdiction and all 
property or interest therein owned by persons within Tribal jurisdiction; 
and to provide for escheat of property to the Tribe.

Section 2. 

Necessary and Proper Powers

The Tribal Council shall have all powers necessary and proper to effectuate any 
specific power enumerated in Section 1. The Tribal Council’s determination as to 
whether any such necessary and proper power is an appropriate and lawful power 
shall be determinative so long as the power does not violate any provision of this 
Constitution.

Section 3. 

Contracts Inviolate

The Tribal Council shall not have the power to terminate, abrogate, or impair a 
contract or agreement that was lawfully and duly entered into by the Tribe unless 
there is cause therefore, or nonperformance by the other contracting party.
 
 

ARTICLE V - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. General Elections

The General Elections for the Tribal Council shall be held on the first Tuesday of 
September. Terms of office for each Tribal Council member shall be elected for a 
term of four (4) years. Terms of office for the seven (7) Tribal Council members 
shall be staggered, in a manner prescribed in the Election Code. Persons who are 
members of the Tribal Council at the time this Constitution is adopted and 
approved shall continue to serve on the Tribal Council until the regular annual 
elections for their respective offices. Elected members shall hold and remain in 
office until their successors are duly elected and installed. Installation shall be 

made at the next duly called regular Tribal Council meeting within thirty (30) 
days following their election. There shall be no limit as to a number of times a 
person can be re-elected to the Tribal Council.

Section 2. Special Elections

Special Elections shall be held when called by law or as required by this 
Constitution or the Election Code.

Section 3. Election Board

There shall be an Election Board to regulate and conduct all elections in 
accordance with the Election Code. Each Election Board member shall serve a 
four-year term or until a successor has been confirmed in accordance with the 
Election Code.

Section 4. Election Code

The Tribal Council shall have the power to enact an Election Code in order to 
govern elections. The Election Board shall have the power to determine whether 
potential candidates meet the qualifications to run for and hold office. The 
Election Board shall have the power to certify election results and require all 
elected officials to swear an oath and allegiance to uphold the Constitution of the 
Tribe.

Section 5. Voters

Citizens of the Tribe who are eighteen years or older shall be eligible to register to 
vote, and only registered voters may vote in elections.

Section 6. Recall

Any recall referendum and any election subsequent to the referendum shall be 
conducted pursuant to the Tribal Election Code.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL ENACTMENTS

 
 Section 1. Codes

The Tribal Council shall manifest all governmental, regulatory and governmental 
administrative action in Tribal Codes. Such enactments shall be available for 
inspection by the enrolled members of the Tribe.

Section 2. Resolutions and Motions

All Tribal Council governmental, administrative, and regulatory actions shall be 

embodied in resolutions. All resolutions shall include a certification showing the 
presence of a quorum and the number of Tribal Council members voting for or 
against the proposed enactment. Other decisions of a temporary nature shall be 
put in the form of Motions and noted in the Minutes.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - JUDICIAL BRANCH

 
 Section 1. 

Establishment of Courts

The Tribal Council may establish General Courts, Appeals Courts, Supreme 
Court, Special Courts, or Courts of Special Jurisdiction pursuant to the Judicial 
Code. In establishing such courts, the Tribal Council shall set forth the 
jurisdiction of such courts, set forth qualifications of judges, and rights of appeals 
and procedures.

Section 2. 

Appointment of Judges

Pursuant to the Judicial Code, the Tribal Council shall establish the means of 
appointing judges, as well as the process and requirements for them to take office.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Tribal members shall have all of the rights as set forth in Federal law generally applicable 
to tribes and Indians, enforceable in accordance with applicable Federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE X - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY
 
 Section 1. 

Sovereign Immunity

The Tribe, as a sovereign government, is immune from judicial suit of any kind or 
administrative action.

Section 2.  Waiver of Immunity from Suit

The Tribal Council may waive the sovereign immunity of the Tribe, its executive 
officials, employees, or departments in accordance with this Constitution. Such 
waiver shall be specific, limited in time, and limited in amount.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. 

Requirements

The Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the registered voters who 
vote at an election called for that purpose, provided that at least 51% of those 
registered to vote shall vote in such election.

Section 2. 

Request for an Election

A. 

The Tribal Council may by law call for an election to amend the Constitution.

B.  Fifty-one percent of all citizens registered to vote in Tribal elections may upon 

presentation of a petition call for an election to amend the Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - ADOPTION

 
 Section 1. 

This Constitution shall be initially adopted, and subsequently 

revoked or amended, by a majority vote of the registered voters of 
the General Membership of this Tribe voting at an election for 
initial adoption, revocation, or amendment.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - EFFECTIVE DATE AND INITIAL ELECTION

 
 Section 1. Approval

This constitution shall become effective when approved by an election of 
The Tribal Voting Membership of the Tribe. The initial election for 
Tribal Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Tribal Council Members 
shall occur within one-year of the ratification of this Constitution.
The Tribal Chairperson, Vice-Chairperson, and Tribal Council shall take 
office upon certification of the election by the Election Committee.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV-CERTIFICATION

 
 This is to certify that this Constitution was adopted June 26, 2005 at a duly

called Election of the Tribal Voting Membership of the Pinoleville Tribe. This 
Constitution was adopted by a vote of 106 For, 22 Against, and 0 Abstentions.
 
 

PINOLEVILLE INDIAN RESERVATION
 
 367 N. State St., Suite 204 Ukiah, CA 95482 Ph: 707-463-1454 FAX: 707-463-6601

Pinoleville Election Committee 
Constitution Election Results 
For June 26, 2005

VOTES:

Yes-106

NO-22

Constitution Approved by Majority Vote:

Confirmed by Election Committee: June 26, 2005.
 
 

PINOLEVILLE IN DIAN RESERVATION
 
 367 N. State St. Suite 204 Ukiah, CA 95482 Ph: 707- 463-1454 FAX:707-463-6601

5-28-05-01

Prior to March 2, 2004, Section 16 of the IRA provided in part that

Any Indian tribe shall have the right to organize for its common welfare, and may 
adopt an appropriate constitution and bylaws, and any amendments thereto, which 
shall become effective when-

(1) 

ratified by a majority vote of the adult members of the tribe or tribes at 
a special election authorized and called by the Secretary [of the 
Interior] under such rules and regulations as the Secretary may 
prescribe; and

(2)  approved by the Secretary pursuant to subseclion (d) of this section.

The election process described in Section 16, and in the regulations at 25 CFR 81, 
became known as a Secretarial election. The Bureau of Indian Affairs (BIA) generally 
conducts such election. Upon the successful completion of this process, the Indian tribe 
was said to be “reorganized.”

On Mach 2, 2004, President George W. Bush signed P.L. 108-204 (118 Stat. 543) into 
law. Title I, Section 103, of P.L. 108-204, entitled "Tribal Sovereignty, “amends Section 
16 of the IRA by adding subsection (h) (hereto, and provides that

(h) TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY - Notwithstanding any other provision of 

this Act

(1)  each Indian tribe shall retain inherent sovereign power to adopt 
governing documents under procedures other than those 
specified in this section; and

(2)  nothing in this Act invalidates any constitution or other 

governing document adopted by an Indian tribe after June 18, 
1934, in accordance with the authority described in paragraph
(1).
 
 

PINOLEVILLE INDIAN RESERVATION

 
 367 N. State St. Suite 204 Ukiah, CA 95482 Ph: 707- 463-1454 FAX:707-463-6601

WHEREAS A Constitution for the Pinoleville tribe will be presented to the Pinoleville 
Tribal Citizens for ratification, and

WHEREAS The Election Committee for the tribe will conduct said election and certify 
the result, and

WHEREAS: Said election result represents 51% of the voting majority in support of 
adoption of the Constitution for the Pinoleville Indian Reservation, and

WHEREAS: The amendment to Section 16 of the IRA brought about by P.L 108-201 
provides Indian tribe that have not yet completed the “reorganization" process an 
opportunity to organize their governing bodies through processes other than the 
Secretarial election process Most importantly, the Secretary of the Interior and the BIA 
no longer need to be involved in the process

THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED; On March 2, 2004, President George W. Bush 
signed P.L. 108-204 (118 Stat. 543) into law Title 1, Section 103, of P.L 108-204, 
entitled “Tribal Sovereignty, "amends Section 16 of the IRA by adding subsection (h) 
thereto, and provides that

(1)  TRIBAL SOVEREIGNTY- Notwithstanding any other provision of 

this Act

(1) each Indian tribe shall retain inherent sovereign power to adopt 

governing documents under procedures other than those 
specified in this section; and

(2)  nothing in this Act invalidates any constitution or other 

governing document adopted by an Indian tribe after June 18, 
1934, in accordance with the authority described in paragraph 
(1).

THEREFORE BE IT RESOLVED: That the Tribal Citizens of the Pinoleville Indian 
Reservation certifies that the Constitution for the Pinoleville Indian tribe, will be adopted 
using the process of Pl. 108-204(118 Stat. 543) Title 1, Section 103, entitled ‘“Tribal 
Sovereignty",

Certify by General Membership:

Vote: 82 Yes 8

No

