 
  
 United States Department of the Interior 
 
BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

 
 WASHINGTON, D.C. 20245

IN REPLY REFER TO:

Tribal Government Services (TR)

Through: Eastern Area Director

Mr. Robert Benn 
Superintendent, Choctaw Agency 
421 Powell 
Philadelphia, Mississippi 39350

Dear Mr. Benn:

In accordance with Federal regulations at 25 CFR Part 81.5(f), the authorization to 
call a Secretarial election for the purpose of adopting (or rejecting) an appropriate 
constitution for the Poarch Band of Creek Indians which was issued on July 8, 1985, 
was void 90 days from the date of issuance. According to our calculation, the 
authorization expired on October 7, 1985, without an indication from the Poarch 
Band accepting our recommended modifications to the document submitted on 
January 30, 1985. Because an appropriate constitution is critical to the furtherance 
of the political relationship which should exist between the Federal Government and 
a Federally-recognized Indian tribe, we are extending the regulatory time limits of 
25 CFR Part 81.5(f).

The 1934 Indian Reorganization Act, 25 U.S.C. 476, provides that "Any Indian tribe, 
or tribes, residing on the same reservation, shall have the right to organize for its 
common welfare, and may adopt an appropriate constitution and bylaws, which shall 
become effective when ratified by a majority vote of the adult members of the tribe, 
or of the adult Indians residing on such reservation, as the case may be, at a special 
election authorized and called by the Secretary of the Interior under such rules and 
regulations as he may prescribe . . . ." The Band disseminated on July 1, 1985, a 
document which purports to be an "approved" constitution of the Poarch Band of 
Creek Indians but which has not been approved by the Secretary and, in our opinion, 
is not appropriate.

Our primary concerns about the proposed constitution which has now apparently been 
disseminated as "approved" relate to the fictionalized representation in Article I 
that persons listed as ’Indian" on the 1870 and 1900 censuses are fullblood Creek 
Indians. The fictionalized representation regarding blood quantum makes the proposed 
constitution inappropriate for Secretarial approval. The 1934 Indian Reorganization 
Act authorizes the Secretary to approve only appropriate constitutions. If the 
Poarch Band is insistent on using the early censuses as its base roll and arbitrarily 
designating persons listed as "Indian" thereon as fullblood Creek Indians in its proposed 
constitution, the Secretary will not approve nor accord validity to the proposed 
constitution.

The acknowledgement process which resulted in the determination that the Poarch 
Band of Creek Indians exists as an Indian tribe found, inter alia, that the petitioning 
group's membership standards and blood quantum statistics were acceptable for tribal 
purposes. Indeed, in the final acknowledgement notice appearing in the Federal 
Register of June 11, 1984, the following language appears:

Blood quantum statistics concerning the Poarch Band of Creeks 
which are found within the proposed finding, specifically on 
page 7 of both the memorandum of recommendation and its 
attached genealogical technical report, are solely for tribal 
membership purposes. Once acknowledged under 25 CFR Part 
83, the Bureau's Tribal Enrollment staff will provide specific 
guidance in computing more factual blood quantums of persons 
named on the tribe's basic membership roll for use in certifying 
individual members for Federal purposes. Blood quantums 
computed for tribal purposes may not necessarily agree with 
those computed for Federal purposes.

Clearly, it was never contemplated that the identical membership standards and blood 
quantum computations found acceptable solely for tribal purposes should become 
institutionalized in the Band's constitution. Instead, the Bureau anticipated that 
the Band would be amenable to our offer of assistance in correcting patent 
inaccuracies in blood quantum computations and resolving membership standards in 
order that the Band's constitution would be appropriate for Secretarial approval.

An appropriate tribal constitution which is suitable for secretarial approval is binding 
on both the Tribe and the United States because it expresses the relationship that 
exists between a Federally-recognized tribe and the Federal Government. On the 
other hand, a constitution which is inadequate or based on factual and legal 
inaccuracies has doubtful status because it is neither an expression of the terms of 
the Federal/tribal relationship nor can it bind or involve both parties equally. The 
Poarch Band of Creek Indians cannot bind the Federal Government in any agreement 
by the unilateral dissemination of the July 1 document which purports to be the 
Band's constitution.

Please open discussions with the Poarch Band about the proposed modified constitution 
we recommended and sent to you under cover of our letter dated July 8, 1985. 
Emphasize the benefits to the Band of having a constitution which in all its provisions 
clearly expresses and encompasses the terms of the Federal/tribal relationship. If 
the Secretary has not approved an appropriate constitution, he is not bound by the 
terms of such a document. Our authorization to call a Secretarial election for the 
purpose of adopting (or rejecting) an appropriate constitution for the Poarch Band 
is hereby extended for an additional 90 days. Please provide us with a report of 
your discussion with the Band concerning the matters contained herein.

Sincerely,

cc: Surname, TR Chron.:440 Chron.,101-A, Mailroom
Holdup:TNArmstrong:peb:ll/5/85:TR Disk

Indian Affairs

Deputy Assistant Secretary - 
 
 

CONSTITUTION

OF THE

POARCH BAND OF CREEK INDIANS

 
 Preamble

We, the members of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians, acknowledg
ing the powers of inherent and aboriginal tribal sovereignty, 
and exercising the right of self-determination, and with the 
desire to organize pursuant to 25 U.S.C. 476 and the Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat., 984), hereby adopt this Constitution and our 
Tribal Government in order to:

(1)  Continue forever, with the help of God our Creator, 

our unique identity as members of the Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians, and to protectthat identity 
from forces that threaten to diminish it;

(2)  Protect our inherent rights as members of a sover

eign American Indian tribe;

(3)  Promote our cultural and religious beliefs and to 

pass them in our own way to our children, grand
children, and grandchildren's children forever;

(4)  Help our members achieve their highest potential 

in education, physical and mental health, and 
economic development;

(5)  Maintain good relations with other Indian tribes, 

the United States, the State of Alabama, and local 
governments;

(6)  Support the Government of the United States and 
encourage our members to be loyal citizens;

(7)  Acquire, develop, and conserve resources to achieve 

economic and social self-sufficiency for our tribe;

(8)  Insure that our people shall live in peace and 

harmony among ourselves and with all other people.
 
 

ARTICLE I - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1.  Eligibility

Membership of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians shall consist of:

(A)  All persons enumerated as Indian on the following official 

documents:

(1)  1870 U.S. Census of Escambia County, Alabama
(2)  1900 U.S. Census of Escambia County, Alabama and
(3)  1900 U.S. Special Indian Census of Monroe County,

Alabama.

NOTE: For the purpose of computing blood quantum of their de
cendants, for tribal membership, all Indians eligible under 
Section 1 (A) are hereby declared as fullblood (4/4) Creek 
Indians and shall constitute the base roll of the Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians.

(B)  All living descendants of those eligible under Section 1(A) 
of at least one fourth (1/4) degree Indian blood, provided 
they are not enrolled as members of any other tribe, group or 
band of Indians.

(C)  All children of at least one-fourth (1/4) degree of Indian 
blood born to an enrolled member of the Poarch Band of Creek

Indians

Section 2.  Powers of to Determine Membership

The Poarch Creek Indian Tribal Council shall have the sole au
thority to determine membership of the Poarch Band of Creek 
Indians. No decree of any Court purporting to determine member
ship in the Poarch Band of Creek Indians, paternity, or degree 
of Creek Indian or other blood shall be recognized as determi
nation of membership in the Poarch Band of Creek Indians.

Section 3.  Membership Ordinance

The Tribal Council shall enact an ordinance establishing pro
cedures for processing membership matters including application 
procedures and blood degree corrections of the roll as provided 
in Article I, Section I of this Constitution, within six months 
of the First Tribal Council's Election to office under this 
Constitution. That ordinance shall contain procedures, including 
the right of appeal.

Section 4.  Adoption and Loss of Membership

The Tribal Council shall have the power to prescribe rules and 
regulations governing the adoption of members and loss of member
ship.
 
 

ARTICLE II - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Individual Rights

Members of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians shall have the follow
ing rights:

The right to equal opportunity to participate in the 
economic resources and activities of the Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians in accordance with eligiblity re
quirements set by the Tribe; and the right to exercise 
the tribal rights and privileges of members of the 
Poarch Band of Creek Indians where not in conflict 
with other provisions of this Constitution, tribal 
laws and ordinances, or the laws of the United States.
 
 

ARTICLE III

TERRITORY AND AUTHORITY OF GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1.

Territory

The jurisdiction of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians shall extend 
to all lands now held in the name of the Band or which hereafter 
may be acquired for or by and held in the name of the Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians.

Section 2.  Authority

The authority of the government established by this Constitution 
shall extend over all persons and property now or hereafter in
cluded within the jurisdiction of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians, 
except and only as limited by this Constitution and the Laws of 
the United States. The government shall not inhibit any person's 

 right to enjoy freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, 

assembly and association, and other rights enumerated by Federal 
Law.

Section 3.  Savings Clause

Any rights or powers heretofore vested in the Poarch Band of Creek 
Indians, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution, shall 

not be lost by their omission but maybe exercised by the adop
tion of appropriate amendments of the Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - BRANCHES OF GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1.  General Council

Members of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians who are eighteen 
(18) years of age or older shall constitute the General Council. 
In accordance with Article V, VI, VII, VIII, and IX of this Con
stitution, the General Council shall have the powers specified 
in Section 2 of this Article.

Section 2.  Powers of the General Council

(a)  Elect Tribal Council members;

(b)  Exercise the powers of intiative and referendum;

(c)  Recall elected tribal officials;

(d)  Amend this Constitution pursuant to Article VIII; and

(e)  Make advisory recommendations to the Tribal Council.

Section 3.

Tribal Council

The Tribal Council shall consist of nine (9) members elected 
by the General Council to terms of three years each, except as 
provided in Article VII, Section 6, and each member shall con
tinue until his or her successor is duly elected and installed 
The Tribal Council shall elect from its membership a Chairman, 
Vice-Chairman, Secretary, and a Treasurer. Five members shall 
constitute a quorum.

Section 4. Powers of the Tribal Council

(a)  Prevent the sale, disposition, or encumbrance of 

tribal trust lands, interest in lands, or other 
tribal assets, unless prevented by the terms under 
which such lands were acquired;

(b)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and ad

vancement of the rights of the Poarch Band of Creek 
Indians;

(c)  Consult, negotiate, contract, and conclude arrange

ments on behalf of the tribe with federal, state, 
and local governments on all matters within the 
powers of the governing body authorized and included 
in this Constitution;

(d)  As authorized by law, manage, lease, permit, or 

otherwise deal with tribal lands, interest in lands 
or other tribal assets and purchase of otherwise 
acquired lands or interests in lands within or with
out the reservation, provided tribal trust lands 
shall not be sold without the approval of the General 
Council;

(e)  Engage in any business that will further the economic 

well-being of the members of the tribe, or undertake 
any programs for the economic advancement of the people;

(f)  Make and perform contracts and agreements of every 

description, consistent with the provisions of this 
Constitution;

(g)  Borrow money from the Federal Government, or other 

sources, and to direct the use of such funds for 
productive purposes;

(h)  Prepare an annual budget and administer any funds 

within the control of the tribe; make expenditures 
from available funds for tribal purposes, including 
salaries and expense of tribal officials or employees. 
All expenditures of tribal funds shall be authorized 
by resolution in a legal session and the amounts so 
expended shall be a matter of public record for tribal 
members;

(i)  The Tribal Council shall cause to be installed, main

tained, and audited, a complete and detailed accounting 
system; and such safeguards as bonding officials and 
employees responsible for the safety, accuracy, and 
maintenance of such records and funds. All checks, 
drafts, and other orders for the payment of tribal 
money, notes or other indebtedness issued in the name 
of the tribe shall be signed by such officers/ or 
agents, as provided for in this Constitution;

(j)  Advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to 
all appropriation estimates or federal projects for 
the benefit of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians prior 
to the submission of such estimates or projects to 
the Office of Management and Budget and to Congress;

(k) Establish and enforce ordinances governing the con

duct and civil relations of the residents within 
the territorial jurisdiction of the Tribe and estab
lish a civil and criminal law enforcement code and 
judicial system governing the conduct of the Indian 
residents within the reservation lands of the Poarch 
Band of Creek Indians by a separate and independent 
judicial system whose powers and duties shall not 
be encroached upon by another branch of tribal govern
ment except as may be provided for by this Constitution 
or any amendment thereto;

(1)  Levy and collect taxes, including general and special 
assessments from any member or other person or entity 
residing on or engaged in an activity on the tribal 
lands of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians;

(m)  Regulate trade, inheritance, land holdings and use, 

and private dealings in tribal land among members 
and other persons or entities residing on or engaged 
in activity on the tribal lands of the Poarch Band 
of Creek Indians;

(n)  Exercise its powers under this Constitution and to 
exercise all inherent powers of the Poarch Band of 
Creek Indians not expressly excluded from its au
thority by the U.S, Congress;

(o)  Organize and maintain subordinate committees, organ
izations, profit and/or non-profit corporations.

(p)  Approve or disapprove any salary or wages paid tor 

performances of Tribal Council duties;
 
 

ARTICLE V - COUNCIL PROCEDURES

 
 Section 1. General Council

The General Council shall hold meetings in accordance with the 
following procedures, and shall exercise its electoral power 
in accordance with the provisions of Article IV of this Consti

tution.

(a)  Annual meeting of the General Council shall be 

held on the first Saturday of June. The meeting 
shall include the election of Tribal Council 

members;

(b)  special meetings of the General Council may be 

called by the Tribal Council upon one month's 
notice to the membership of the General Council. 
The Tribal Council may call such meetings upon 
its own motion, but it must call such meetings 
at the request of the Election Board which pre
sents a properly verified petition signed by 
thirty (30) percent of the General Council of 
the Poarch Band of Creek Indians.
 
 

 
 
 
 (c)  The agenda for the General Council meetings shall 

be set by the Tribal Council, provided that any 
member may submit, in writing, items to the Tribal 
Council for consideration for the agenda, and pro
vided. further that each agenda shall include time 
for discussion of items from the floor regardless 
of whether said items appear on the agenda. The 
agenda shall be posted at a public place at the 
tribal center and available to individual members 
upon request;

(d)  The Tribal Council Chairman shall chair General 

Council meetings;

(e)  A quorum shall consist of thirty (30) percent of 

the General Council for all purposes.

Section 2. Tribal Council

The Tribal Council shall hold meetings and take actions in accord
ance with the following procedures, which it may augment by its 
own rules of procedures so long as they do not conflict with any 
provisions of this Constitution:

(a)  Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be 

held quarterly at a time and place to be set by 
the Tribal Council;

Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be
 called by the Chairman at his or her discretion, 
but the Chairman must call a special meeting 
upon written request of three or more members of 
the Tribal Council. No special meeting shall be 
called without at least twelve hours notice to 
each member, unless each member shall waive the 
notice requirement in writing;

(c)  The agenda shall be set by the Chairman, provided 
that it shall include any item submitted upon the 
written request of three or more members of the 
Tribal Council. The agenda shall be available 
to Tribal Council members no less than five days 
prior to any regularly scheduled meeting, and at 
the time notice is given of any special meeting. 
Items may be added to the agenda at a Tribal 
Council meeting upon concurrence of three or 
more members;

(d)  Matters of business shall be decided by majority

 vote, except where otherwise required by this Con

stitution or the Tribal Council's own rules set 
forth by ordinance. Voting shall be by roll call 
votes and the ayes and nays shall be recorded in 
minutes;

(e)  All meetings of the Tribal Council shall be open 

to membership of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians; 
however, the Tribal Council may recess at its 
discretion to discuss any matter in a closed or 
executive session, provided that the general sub
ject matter discussed is expressed in the motion 
calling such session and no final or official 
action is taken thereon in the closed or executive 
session.

(f)  All final decisions of the Tribal Council on matters 

of general and permanent interest to the members of 
the tribe shall be embodied in ordinances. The Ord
inances shall be collected and made available to 
tribal members and other affected persons upon 
reasonable request;

(g)  All final decisions of the Tribal Council on matters 

of temporary interest shall be embodied in resolu
tions. The resolutions shall be collected and made 

 available to tribal members and others affected 

upon reasonable request;

(h)  All questions of procedures shall be determined by 

Robert's Rules of Order;

(i)  No Tribal Council member shall vote on any matter 
wherein he or she or a member of his or her immed
iate family has a direct personal interest, including 
but not limited to employment contracts, project 
funding, and appointments to tribal committees;

(j)  A written record shall be kept of Tribal Council 

proceedings. The record shall be open for inspec
tion by all members of the Poarch. Band of Creek 
Indians.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Chairman

The Chairman shall be the Chief Executive Officer of the Poarch 
Band of Creek Indians, and shall preside at the Poarch Creek 
Tribal Council meetings and shall carry out and implement all 
ordinances, resolutions, and directives of the Council. In the 
event of his absence or in the event of his death, disability, 
resignation, removal, or if for any reason he is unable to 
perform his duties and responsibilities, the Vice-Chairman 
shall act as Chairman.

Section 2.  Vice-Chairman

The Vice-Chairman shall preside at any meeting in the absence 
of the Chairman and in the event of the Chairman's death, dis
ability, resignation, or removal from office, he shall serve 
the remainder of the term as Chairman.

Section 3.  Treasurer

The Treasurer shall supervise the financial affairs of the Poarch 
Eand of Creek Indians in accordance with policies, direction, 
and subject to controls as are established by the Poarch Creek 
Tribal Council, and he or she shall be responsible for maintain
ing the necessary financial records. The Treasurer shall provide 
financial reports at least annually to the Poarch Creek Tribal 
Council.

Section 4.  Secretary

The Secretary shall be responsible for maintaining the records 
and files of the Poarch Creek Tribal Council other than the 
financial records. The Secretary shall be responsible for 
taking and recording the minutes of all Tribal Council meetings 
and such other official meetings as the Tribal Chairman may
 
 

ARTICLE VII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1.  Voters

Members of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians who are eighteen 
(18) years of age or older shall have the right to vote in all 
tribal elections.

Section 2.  Election Ordinance

The Tribal Council shall enact an election ordinance consis
tent with the provisions for appointment by the Tribal Council 
of a three-member objective Election Board. The ordinance shall 
include provision for settlement of election disputes, including 
the right to appeal to the tribal judiciary to be established 
under Article IV, Section 4 (k) of this Constitution.

Section 3.

tanner of Voting

All elections shall be secret ballot, except that the General 
Council may make advisory recommendations to the Tribal Council 
by voice vote or show of hands at General Council meetings.

Voting by mail and absentee ballots shall be provided for by 
ordinance. The ordinance shall require that such ballots be 
made available to members sufficiently in advance of any elec
tion to permit the ballots to be submitted by voters to the 
tribal office prior to the scheduled date of the election. 
Ballots so submitted shall be counted along with ballots cast 
in person at the poll.

Section 4.  Tribal Council Election

Elections for the Tribal Council shall be held on the first Saturday 
in June. The time and place of voting shall be designated by 
the Tribal Council. New Tribal Council members shall be certi
fied by the Election Board. Installation shall occur on the 
day following the certification of election results.

Candidates must be members of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians 
who will be at least twenty-one (21) years of age on the date 
of the election, and who have never been expelled in accordance 
with Article VIII, Section 3, and who have never been convicted 
of a felony. Candidates must file statements of their candidacy 
with the Election Board not less than thirty (30) days before 
the annual election. The Election Board shall make public a 
list of candidates, and the time and place of the election, not 
less than twenty (20) days before the election.

Each voter shall be allowed to cast one vote for each vacancy 
on the Tribal Council. No more than one vote per candidate 
shall be cast. The winners shall be chosen by plurality accord
ing to the rank order of votes received. In the event of a tie, 
the winner shall be chosen by flipping a coin under the supervision 
of the election Board.

Section 5.  Tribal Council Officer Election

Each Council officer shall serve for a term of three (3) years 
or until the end of his term as a Tribal Council members, which
ever shall come first.

Tribal Council officers shall be elected following installation 
of the newly elected Tribal Council member, if a vacancy exists.

Section 6.  First Election

The first Tribal Council elected under this Constitution shall 
be elected with three members at three year terms', three members 
at two year terms, and three members at one-year terms, or until 
his successor is duly elected and installed. The winners shall 

be chosen by plurality according to the rank order of votes 
received. In the event of a tie, the winner shall be chosen 
by flipping a coin under the supervision of the Election Board. 
Thereafter, in 1986, there shall be an annual election in June 
and the term-of-office shall be three years in length, or until 
successors are duly elected and installed, provided that if 
there are more than 24 candidates, there shall be an immediate 
run off election among the top 18 candidates.

Section 7.  Election Board

The members of the Election Board shall serve for staggered 
three-year (3) terms of office and shall be removable prior to 
the expiration of their terms for cause. No person who holds 
any elective tribal office or is a candidate for such office 
shall be eligible to serve on the Election Board. The Election 
Board shall supervise all tribal elections, verify petitions by 
tribal members, and perform such other duties as are set by the 
Election ordinance.

Section 8.  Vacancies

In the event that any elective tribal office becomes vacant be
tween elections, the Tribal Council shall elect a person who 
meets the qualifications of a candidate for that position to 
fill the vacancy. Such person shall assume office and serve 
until the next annual Tribal Council election at which time the 
members of the General Council shall elect a person to serve the 
balance of the three year term of the office which became vacant.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1.

Initiative

Upon receipt and verification by the Election Board of a peti
tion of at least thirty (30) percent of the General Council of 
the Poarch Band of Creek Indians a proposed ordinance or resolu
tion made by the people shall be submitted for a vote by the 
General Council at a regular or special election to be held 
within sixty (60) days of verification of the petition by the 
Election Board. The vote of a majority of those actually voting 
shall be conclusive and binding upon the Tribal Council.

Section 2. Referendum

Upon the request of two-thirds of the total membership of the 
Tribal Council, any proposed or previously enacted ordinance 

or resolution of the Tribal Council shall be submitted for a 
vote by the General Coucnil at a regular or special election 
to be held within sixty (60) days of the vote by the Tribal 
Council. The vote by a majority of at least thirty (30) per 
cent of the General Council shall be conclusive and binding 
upon the Tribal Council.

Section 3. Recall

Upon receipt and verification by the Election Board of a peti
tion of at least thirty (30) percent of the General Council of 
the Poarch Band of Creek Indians, it shall be the duty of the 
Election Board to call a special election to consider the re
call of the elected tribal official named in the petition.
The election shall be held within sixty (60) days of receipt 
of the petition by the Election Board, provided that if the 
petition is received less than six (6) months prior to the 
annual election, the Election Board may direct that the matter 
be placed on the ballot of that election. If a majority of those 
actually voting favor the recall of the official, the office 
shall be declared vacant and filled in accordance with Article 
VII, Section 8 of this Consitution. If the recall fails, that 
officer cannot be recalled again for twelve (12) months.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. Election to vote on proposed amendments to this 
Constitution shall be authorized by resolution of the Tribal 
Council.

The General Council shall have the right to initiate proposals 
to amend this Constitution by submitting to the Tribal Council 
a petition signed by at least thirty (30) percent of the General 
Council. If the petition is determined to be valid pursuant to 
the petitioning provisions of the tribe's Election Ordinance, 
the Tribal Council shall then consent to the proposal by an 
appropriate resolution for authorization of an election to 
vote upon adoption of the proposed amendment.

Section 2. If adopted by a majority of the qualified voters 
votinc in an election authorized by a Tribal Council Resolution 
at which election at least thirty (30) percent of those quali
fied to vote cast their ballots, the amendment shall become
effective.
 
 

ARTICLE

X -

TRIBAL ADMINISTRATIVE PLAN OF OPERATIONS

 
 The Tribal Council shall develop an Administrative Plan of Opera
tions in a formal ordinance which shall further specify duties 
and responsibilities of the tribal officers and employees.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority of vote of the 
qualified voters of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians voting 
at an election called by the Tribal Counil, in which at least 
thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote shall cast their 
ballots, shall be adopted upon certification of the Tribal 
Election Board.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

 
 Pursuant to an order issued on APRIL 9, 1985,
by the Tribal Council of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians, 
this Constitutuion of the Poarch Band of Creek Indians was 
submitted for adoption to the qualified voters of the tribe 
and was on Saturday, June 1, 1985, duly adopted/rejected by a 
vote of 292  for, and 65 against, in an election
in which at least thirty (30) percent of the 1,031 
entitled to vote, cast their ballots.

June 6, 

1985
date

Poarch Band Creek Indians
 
 

TRIBAL COUNCIL OFFICES

 
 Route 3, Box 243-A

ATMORE, ALABAMA 36502

TELEPHONE (205) 368-9136

July 1, 1985

Mr. John W. Fritz
Deputy Assistant Secretary (Operations)
United States Department of Interior
Bureau of Indian Affairs
1951 Constitution Avenue, N.W.
Washington, D.C. 20245

Dear Mr. Fritz:

Please find enclosed a copy of the approved Constitution of the Poarch Band of 
Creek Indians as per Tribal Election held on June 1, 1985. As you know, a pro
posed Constitution was submitted to the Bureau almost one year ago for review and 
approval by the Secretary of Interior. Due to the lapse of time with no response 
and the necessity of the Tribe to have a governing document, the Constitutional 
Election was held, the Constitution was approved and the Tribal Council was elected 
in order that legal status would be clarified following Federal Recognition 
August 11, 1984.

Also, enclosed is a copy of the Election Procedures following the format in 25 
C.F.R, Section 81, Certification of Election Results, and Tribal Council Direc
tory. The Organizational Meeting was held on June 8, 1985. Tribal Council members 
were administered the Oath of Office and officers were elected. 

Following a review of this documentation and on behalf of the Tribal Council, I 
request that you seek approval of our approved Constitution by Mr. Hodel, Secre
tary of the Interior. Thank you for guidance and support with this very important 
matter.

Sincerely,

Eddie L. Tullis 
Tribal Chairman

Enclosures

cc: Mr. B. D. Ott, Director, Eastern Area Office/B.I.A.

Mr. Robert Benn, Superintendent, Choctaw Area Agency
 
 

 
 
 