 
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 

OF

THE PONCA TRIBE OF NEBRASKA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska, in order to restore, preserve and protect all 
rights aboriginally held by our people and their descendants, promote peace, prosperity, 
happiness, and the general welfare of the members of our Tribe and our posterity, to exercise 
home rule, to assert our inherent sovereignty, to protect our right of self-government, to conserve 
and perpetuate all worthy traditions and cultural elements of our people long established by 
custom, to improve our social order, to protect our rights as individuals, to promote our 
economic welfare, to promote domestic tranquility, to promote business enterprises both 
cooperative and individual, to promote educational opportunities for all Ponca people, to 
consolidate our land holdings by purchase, exchange, transfer, gift, or otherwise, do ordain and 
establish this Constitution in accordance with our inherent sovereignty, and all previous aboriginal 
rights of our members and Treaties previously entered into with the United States of America.

The adoption of this Constitution by the members shall continue eternally the unique identity of 
all people that comprise the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. This Constitution shall serve to protect 
our children, grandchildren, and our grandchildren's children forever, from any forces that may 
attempt to threaten or diminish the rights and identity of our people.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY

 
 The territorial jurisdiction of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska under this Constitution shall extend 
to all trust or tribal lands as described by metes and bounds in the Treaties heretofore ratified by 
the Congress of the United States of America and shall cover all future additions that are within 
or without said boundary lines that may be acquired by the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska, or by the 
United States of America and held in trust for the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska or its members, 
regardless if the eligible lands are under the control of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska at the time 
of the adoption of this Constitution or come under the control of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska 
in the future. The Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall exercise its authority and jurisdiction outside 
the territory above described to the fullest extent not specifically prohibited by Federal law. It 
is recognized that the members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska have dispersed throughout the 
United States of America and this Constitution shall extend to them insofar as individual members 
are affected thereby.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1.  The membership of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall consist as follows:

(a)  All persons listed and their lineal descendants of the tribal rolls of April 1, 1934, 
January 1, 1935, and June 18, 1965, as compiled by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

(b)  All persons entitled to be listed on the membership roll of June 18, 1965 who were 
not listed on the roll, notwithstanding the application or appeal deadline dates of 
P.L. 87-629.

(c)  No individual is eligible for enrollment to membership if at the time they make 
application for membership in the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska they are currently 
enrolled with another federally recognized Tribe, Band or group unless an 
application for relinquishment is made with the other Tribe contingent upon 
enrollment with the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

(d)  Any person not otherwise eligible for enrollment for membership in the Ponca Tribe 
of Nebraska shall be entitled to appeal a denial of membership by the Enrollment 
Committee to the Ponca Tribal Council and submit at such appeal clear and 
convincing evidence they possess some degree of Ponca Tribe of Nebraska blood. 
After hearing the appeal, membership shall be granted if the Ponca Tribal Council, 
by a two-thirds vote, approves the application of said person for enrollment into the 
membership of the Tribe. The decision of the Ponca Tribal Council shall constitute 
a final determination.

Section 2.  The Ponca Tribal Council shall have the power to enact and promulgate resolutions 
and ordinances governing future enrollment of members and reinstatement of membership into 
the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

Section 3. The Ponca Tribal Council shall establish an honorary roster for persons adopted by 
the Tribe who do not meet the requirements for membership in the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. 
Honorary members shall not have the right to vote, hold office, or otherwise exercise the rights 
or receive benefits of the members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

Section 4. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to deprive any Tribal member 
of any vested right

Section 5. The Term "Ponca" shall be used hereinafter in replacement of the term "Indian" or 
"Native American".

Section 6. A Ponca member may relinquish his or her enrollment as a member of the 
Ponca Tribe of Nebraska by submitting a signed and acknowledged statement clearly requesting 
that his or her name be removed from the membership records of the Tribe.

Section 7. Enrollment by any person as a member of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall not 
deprive that person of any rights, duties, privileges, immunities, and responsibilities that they 
shall hold as citizens of the United States of America.

Section 8. A roll of members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall be current and shall be kept 
by an Enrollment Committee. Once every year in the month of April, the Enrollment Committee 
shall conduct a census of the members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska and the roll of members 
shall be amended according to the findings of the census conducted. Subject to the right of 
privacy of the individual members the results of all census findings may be furnished to the 
Department of Interior and Indian Health Services.
 
 

ARTICLE III - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 Section 1. 
or any of its agencies shall not:

In order to protect its members the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska, its governing Council,

(1)  make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or abridging the 
freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the people peaceably to assemble 
and to petition for a redress of grievances.

(2)  violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, houses, papers, and 
effects against unreasonable search and seizures, nor issue warrants, but upon 
probable cause, supported by oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the 
place to be searched and the person or thing to be seized;

(3)  subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

(4)  compel any person in any criminal case to be a witness against himself;

(5) 

take any private property for a public use without just compensation;

(6)  deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy and public trial, 
to be informed of the nature and cause of the offense, to be confronted with the 
witnesses against him, to have compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his 
favor, and at his own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

(7) 

require excessive bail, impose excessive fines, inflict cruel and unusual punishments;

(8)  deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of its laws or deprive 

any person of liberty or property without due process of law;

(9)  pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto law; or

(10)  deny to any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment of 
over thirty (30) days, the right, upon request, to a trial by jury of fewer than 
six persons.

(11)  Deny to any member of the Tribe any hunting, fishing, trapping, gathering, or any 

water rights as may be accorded to all members of the Tribe.

(12)  Deny to any member their rights as a human being.

Section 2. The privilege of the writ of habeas corpus shall be available to any person, in a 
court of the United States, to test the legality of his detention by an order of a Ponca Tribe of 
Nebraska Court.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - GOVERNING BODY

 
 Section 1. A nine (9) member governing body, known as the Ponca Tribal Council, shall be 
elected by popular vote by district for staggered terms of four (4) years as specified by this 
Constitution and the duly enacted election ordinances. The Council shall consist of eight (8) 
members elected by District, two members from each District, and a Chairperson who is elected 
at large. The Ponca Tribal Council shall constitute the legislative branch of government for 
the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

Section 2. The Ponca Tribal Council shall elect from its membership a Vice Chair, Treasurer 
and Secretary. This group of officers along with the Chairperson shall be known as the 
Executive Committee. The Executive Committee shall constitute the Executive Branch of 
government for the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

Section 3. The Executive Committee, except for the Chairperson, shall be selected to their 
offices by a majority vote on a bi-annual basis by the members of the Ponca Tribal Council. 
Said election shall be made at the Ponca Tribal Council meeting held after the elections held on 
the first Tuesday of November of each election year. Any member of the Executive Committee 
shall be entitled to serve successive terms on the Executive Committee subject to the 
requirements of Article IV, Section 6 herein.

Section 4. The duly elected Chairperson shall be the Executive Officer of the Ponca Tribal 
Council and head of the Executive Committee.

Section 5. The Council districts hereby established shall be by equalization of population. 
Redistricting based upon changes in population distribution shall be done in accordance with duly 
adopted election ordinances. The initial districts are described as follows:

(a)  District One (1): The area consisting of Boyd County, Nebraska, Knox County, 
Nebraska, Charles Mix County, South Dakota, Cedar, Dakota, Holt, Thurston, and 
Dixon Counties of Nebraska, and the States of Iowa, Indiana, South Dakota, 
Arizona, Wisconsin, Utah, and Maryland.

(b)  District Two (2): Douglas County, Nebraska, Washington and Burt Counties of 
Nebraska, and the States of Washington, Georgia, Idaho, Louisiana, Maine, 
New Jersey, North Carolina, Ohio, Pennsylvania, South Carolina, Tennessee, 
Virginia and New York; and all provinces of Canada.

(c)  District Three (3): Lancaster County, Nebraska, Sarpy, Hall and York counties of 
Nebraska, and the States of California, Illinois, Texas, Alaska, Arkansas, Colorado, 
Kansas, and Oklahoma.

(d)  District Four (4): Madison County, Nebraska, Stanton, Platte, Nance, Dodge, 
Wayne, Nuckolls, Morrill and all other counties in the State of Nebraska not 
previously assigned to a District, and the States of Wyoming, Oregon, Florida, 
Missouri, Michigan, Montana, Nevada, Hawaii, and Minnesota

Section 6. No member of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska may serve on the Ponca Tribal Council 
for more than two consecutive terms.

Section 7. The Chairperson shall be required to reside within 100 miles of the headquarters of 
the Tribe or within any service area of the Tribe as established by an act of Congress of the 
United States of America. The headquarters of the Tribe shall be located in Knox County, 
Nebraska. Any person elected as Chairperson who resides outside a 100 mile distance of the 
headquarters or does not reside within a service area shall have ninety (90) days from the date 
of his or her election to establish a residence as required herein. Failure to establish residence 
by the elected Chairperson shall constitute forfeiture of office and the next highest vote getter 
will automatically succeed to the position of Chairperson upon satisfaction of the above residency 
requirements.

Section 8. All Ponca Tribal Council members duly elected pursuant to the adopted election 
ordinances must, within ninety (90) days of their election, have or establish residency in their 
district as follows:

District 1: Within a 100 mile distance from the borders of Boyd County, 
Nebraska, Knox County, Nebraska, Charles Mix County, 
South Dakota.

District 2: Within a 100 mile distance from the border of Douglas County, 

Nebraska.

District 3: Within a 100 mile distance from the border of Lancaster County, 

Nebraska.

District 4: Within a 100 mile distance from the border of Madison County, 

Nebraska.

Failure by any duly elected Ponca Tribal Council member to have or establish a residence as set 
forth in this Section, shall constitute forfeiture of office and that person in said election who had 
the next highest vote total shall succeed to the office after he or she complies with the 
requirement of residency in the district as further defined in a election ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE PONCA TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. ENUMERATED POWERS. The Ponca Tribal Council shall exercise the following 
legislative powers, subject to all express restrictions upon such powers contained in this 
Constitution, the Constitution of the United States of America, Federal Law or any future 
Articles of Amendment.

(a)  To negotiate and contract with the Federal, State and Local governments on behalf of the 
Tribe and to advise and consult with the representatives of the United States of America on 
all activities of the Federal Government that may affect the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska;

(b)  To employ counsel for the protection and advancement of the rights of the Tribe and 
its members. Employment of counsel shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior of the United States of America as long as such approval is required by 
Federal Law.

(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of Tribal lands, interests 
in other lands or other Tribal assets; or other trust lands or assets held by the United States 
of America under Federal Law by virtue of fiduciary duty which may be authorized or 
executed by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America or his designee 
with approval of the Ponca Tribal Council.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the use and benefit of the Tribe in connecton 
with the submission of such estimates to the Office of Management and Budget and to the 
Congress of the United States of America.

(e)  To make leases of Tribal land to members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska and to regulate 

the leases of land in conformity with Article XII of this Constitution.

(f)  To establish an independent corporation to manage all economic affairs and enterprises of 
the Tribe which affairs shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of Interior, so long 
as required by Federal Law in accordance with the terms of a corporate charter which may 
be issued to the Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America or 
by resolution of the Ponca Tribal Council.

(g)  To appropriate for public and governmental purposes of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska 
available funds within the exclusive control of the Tribe, and any other available public or 
private funds, grants, or any other funding source.

(h)  To levy taxes upon persons under the jurisdiction of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska as 

specified by ordinance or resolution.

(i)  To purchase lands for public purposes, under condemnation proceedings if necessary in 
courts of competent jurisdiction and to regulate the inheritance of real and personal property 
within the territory of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

(j)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and general welfare of the Tribe by 
regulating the conduct of trade, and the use and disposition of property under the 
jurisdiction of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska through ordinance, government law 
enforcement and judicial administration.

(k)  To regulate the manner of qualification of candidates, and making nominations of 
candidates for the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska offices and of holding elections as specified by 
duly adopted election ordinances.

(1)  To adopt resolutions and ordinances regulating the procedure of the Ponca Tribal Council 
itself and of other agencies, committees and officials of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

(m)  To encourage and foster the arts, crafts, heritage, traditions and culture of the Ponca Tribe 

of Nebraska.

(n)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes and to regulate the activities 

of such organizations.

(o)  To protect and preserve the property, wildlife, and natural resources of the Tribe.

(p)  To delegate to subordinate boards, committees, or officials, or to cooperative associations 
which are open to all members of the Tribe, any of the foregoing powers, reserving 
the right of the Ponca Tribal Council to review any actions taken by virtue of such 
delegated power.

Section 2. FUTURE POWERS. The Ponca Tribal Council may exercise such powers as may 
in the future be delegated to the Ponca Tribal Council by the members of the Ponca Tribe of 
Nebraska by amendments to this Constitution.

Section 3. RESERVED POWERS. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Ponca 
Tribe of Nebraska by their inherent aboriginal sovereignty, but not expressly referred to in 
this Constitution, shall not be abridged by this Article, but may be exercised by the people of 
the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska through the adoption of appropriate Constitutional amendments.
 
 

ARTICLE VI  - JUDICIAL BRANCH OF GOVERNMENT

 
 The Judicial power of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall consist of a Chief Judge and 
Associate Judges as appointed by the Ponca Tribal Council pursuant to Section 4 of this 
Article.

Section 1. The Ponca Tribe of Nebraska retains the authority to adjudicate all proceedings 
with regard to children as it pertains to the Indian Child Welfare Act.

Section 2. Any Judge of the Court is hereby specifically authorized to review, in any case 
properly before them, the actions of members, of the Ponca Tribal Council, or any other 
officers, agents, or employees of the government of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska to determine 
whether those actions are prohibited or are subject to punishment for violation of this 
Constitution, Constitution of the United States of America, or the laws or ordinances adopted by 
the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. If any action complained of is outside the scope of authority 
delegated to the entity in question, or if a proper authority is being exercised in a prohibited 
manner, the court may enter injunction or other proper, legal, and equitable relief or declare the 
action unconstitutional and void as justice may require.

Section 3. The Chief Judge and the Associate Judges of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall 
serve six (6) year terms beginning at the date of their appointment to office and until their 
successor shall be duly appointed. At the expiration of a term of office, the Chief Judge or 
Associate Judge shall, at his or her option, be considered by the Ponca Tribal Council to a new 
term of office.

Section 4. The Chief Judge and the Associate Judges shall be selected by the Ponca Tribal 
Council from nominees received from a Judicial Nominating Committee. The Judicial 
Nominating Committee shall consist of five (5) members appointed by the Ponca Tribal Council, 
with each District having at least one (1) representative on the Judicial Nominating Committee. 
No member of the Ponca Tribal Council may serve on the Judicial Nominating Committee. The 
Nominating Committee shall select from applicants those persons that they deem to be qualified 
to serve as Chief Judge or Associate Judges. All qualified applicants shall be certified to the 
Ponca Tribal Council by the Judicial Nominating Committee. The Ponca Tribal Council shall 

conduct an open hearing of each nominated person and will then select from the candidates the 
Chief Judge or Judges of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. Any vacancies will be filled by following 
the same nominating and selection process.

Section 5. The Chief Judge and Associate Judges of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska may be 
removed for cause from office as defined by the ordinance upon a showing of habitual neglect 
of the duties of office, oppression in office for personal gain or advantage, or conviction in any 
court of a felony or other crime involving moral turpitude. Removal for cause, as defined 
herein, shall be by petition, signed by at least twenty-five percent (25%) of the voters voting in 
the last tribal election. Said petition for removal shall be filed with the Ponca Tribal Council. 
Any Judge subject to removal by Petition shall be entitled to a hearing before the Ponca Tribal 
Council and the right of due process of law as provided in Article III herein. Hearing for 
removal of any Judge upon a petition for removal shall be conducted by the Ponca Tribal Council 
and a two-thirds affirmative vote of the full Tribal Council for removal shall be required in order 
to remove any Judge from office. The Chair shall be allowed to vote on any matter brought 
before the Council under this Article.

Section 6. The court system of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall be courts of general 
jurisdiction and shall further have jurisdiction in all cases arising under the Constitution, laws, 
ordinances and Treaties of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

Section 7. Upon creation of the Judicial System, the Ponca Tribal Council shall appropriate 
adequate funds to operate the Judicial Branch of government. No decrease in compensation may 
be made to any Judge by the Ponca Tribal Council during a Judge's term of office.
 
 

ARTICLE VII  - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Except for the first election called by and held by the Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America pursuant to Public Law 101-484, Section 8 (b); all other Tribal 
elections shall be held on the first Tuesday in the month of November of even numbered years 
in accordance with the rules and regulations provided in this Constitution and pursuant to duly 
adopted election ordinances of the Ponca Tribal Council. In the first election held under this 
Constitution the Chairman shall be elected to a four year term. In the first election two members 
to the Ponca Tribal Council shall be elected from each District with the candidate receiving the 
greatest number of votes in each District being elected to a four year term and the second place 
candidate being elected to a two year term. Thereafter in all elections, candidates elected to the 
Council shall be elected to four year terms, to thereby establish staggered terms of office.

Section 2. All recognized members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska eighteen (18) years 
of age and over shall be eligible to register to vote in any Tribal Election. In order to vote 
in any election you must be a registered voter. The Process of Members Right to Vote and 
Manner of Registration to Vote shall be included in the election ordinance to be duly adopted by 
the Ponca Tribal Council.

Section 3. Any person elected to the Ponca Tribal Council shall be not less than twenty-five 
(25) years of age; if a convicted felon, shall have been pardoned and all civil rights restored prior 
to an election; any elected person must be an enrolled member of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. 
Any person that has been convicted in any court of any jurisdiction of a crime involving the 
theft of Ponca Tribal funds or property shall not be eligible for election to the Ponca Tribal 
Council or any Ponca Tribal Office irrespective of any pardon or restoration of civil rights for 
said offense involving Ponca Tribal funds or property.

Section 4. The election ordinance shall include, but not be limited to, provisions for an election 
board consisting of an officer in charge acting as Chairperson, and at least two (2) representatives 
from the general members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. It shall be the duty of the election 
board to supervise all elections, verify petitions by members, and perform such other duties in 
compliance with the ordinances adopted by the Ponca Tribal Council and this Constitution. The 
election board shall be empowered to appoint District Election Boards for each District to assist 
it in executing the duties of conducting elections. No Ponca Tribal Council member or any 
candidate for office or any member of their immediate family shall serve on the Election Board 
in any capacity.

Section 5. In order to appear on an election ballot, candidates for Chairperson must file a 
petition signed by 50 enrolled tribal members who are eligible to vote. Candidates for district 
council members must file a petition signed by 25 enrolled tribal members who are eligible to 
vote for the candidate from that district.

ARTICLE VIII - VACANCIES AND REMOVAL/RECALL FROM OFFICE

Section 1. If a council member or officer shall die, resign, be removed or recalled from office, 
fail to attend three (3) consecutive Council meetings without just cause, or shall have a final 
finding of guilt by either the Tribe's Court or a State Court or a Federal Court of a felony or 
misdemeanor involving dishonesty, moral turpitude, or of accepting a bribe; the Ponca Tribal 
Council members shall have power to declare the position vacant by a two-thirds vote of the full 
Council and shall appoint by majority vote of the full Council the replacement who shall be from 
the District that has a vacancy. Any appointee shall serve the balance of the unexpired term.

Section 2. Any elected or appointed person is subject to recall from office upon petition of at 
least thirty (30%) percent of the voters eligible to vote for that person in the last election. The 
Secretary of the Ponca Tribal Council Executive Committee shall receive and determine within 
(45) forty-five days of submission the validity of all recall petitions. If the Secretary for the 
Council fails to issue a written determination on the validity of a recall petition within (45) forty- 
five days of its submission, the recall petition shall be deemed automatically to be valid and recall 
balloting shall be conducted. A person shall be recalled if he or she fails to receive a majority 
of ballots to retain him or her in office on any recall vote. The Ponca Tribal Council as part of 
its duties shall prepare a recall ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - INITIATIVE AND REFERENDUM

 
 Section 1. The exercise of enumerated powers vested in the Ponca Tribal Council shall be 
subject to a referendum vote of the people upon a written petition signed by not less than forty- 
five (45%) percent of the total number of voters eligible to vote in the last election, provided 
further that not less than thirty (30%) percent of the eligible voters shall vote in any such 
referendum balloting. Majority vote shall prevail on any referendum issue. Any referendum 
petition must be filed with the Chairperson of the Ponca Tribal Council or the acting Chairperson 
as the case may be.

Section 2. Any matter of concern to the Tribe not previously considered or acted upon by the 
Ponca Tribal Council may be presented for ballot vote upon a written Petition by the members 
of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. Said petition must be signed by not less than 45 % of the total 
number of voters eligible to vote in the last election. Provided further that not less than 30% of 
the eligible voters shall vote in any such initiative balloting. Majority vote shall prevail on any 
initiative issue. The Petition must be filed with the Chairperson of the Ponca Tribal Council, or 
the Acting Chairperson as the case may be.
 
 

ARTICLE X - POWERS AND DUTIES OF THE EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE

 
 Section 1. The Executive Committee shall consist of the Chairperson, Vice Chair, Secretary, 
Treasurer as provided in Article IV.

Section 2. The Executive Committee shall hold regular monthly meetings at a time and place to 
be determined by the Chair. The Chair shall send out notices to the other members of the 
Executive Committee advising of the time and place of such meeting. The regular monthly 
Executive Committee meeting shall occur prior to the 10th day of every month. Three members 
of the Executive Committee in attendance at any meeting shall constitute a quorum to conduct 
business. A majority vote of the Executive Committee shall be required to approve any action 
of the Executive Committee and the Chairperson shall be entitled to vote on all issues brought 
before the Executive Committee.

Section 3. The Chair is delegated with the responsibility and shall be empowered to act on 
behalf of the Ponca Tribal Council and the Tribe in accordance with the Constitution, resolutions, 
laws and ordinances of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. All actions taken by the Chair shall be 
presented before the next regular meeting of the Ponca Tribal Council for ratification. Any acts 
not so ratified shall be immediately rescinded by the Chair and all actions necessary to rescind 
said act shall be taken.

Section 4. The Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Ponca Tribal Council and Executive 
Committee. The Chair shall conduct the meetings of the Ponca Tribal Council and 
Executive Committee in accordance with the Constitution of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska and 
resolutions enacted by the Ponca Tribal Council. In the event there shall be a conflict of authority 

the Constitution of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall prevail and take precedence over all other 
rules and resolutions. The Chair, or a member of the Executive Committee, in presiding over 
the Ponca Tribal Council, shall not be entitled to vote except in the event of a tie and then the 
Chair's vote shall be the deciding vote. The Chair shall be under bond with a Surety Company 
of recognized standing in an amount to be determined by the Ponca Tribal Council.

Section 5. The Vice-Chair shall preside at all meetings of the Ponca Tribal Council in the 
absence of the Chair and shall act in his/her stead in all matters pertaining to the office of the 
Chair. The Vice-Chair shall be under bond with a Surety Company of recognized standing in 
an amount to be determined by the Ponca Tribal Council.

Section 6. The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceedings of the Ponca Tribal 
Council; shall attend to the keeping of the official records of the Ponca Tribal Council and shall 
be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all correspondence pertaining to the 
business of the Ponca Tribal Council and the Tribe; keep all official records open to inspection 
by the members of the Tribe at all times as provided by ordinance to be adopted by the 
Ponca Tribal Council. The Secretary shall receive and determine the validity of all referendum 
and recall petitions. Clerical staff shall be provided to the Secretary by the Ponca Tribal Council 
to assist in keeping and maintaining the records of all proceedings. The Secretary shall be under 
bond with a Surety Company of recognized standing in an amount to be determined by the Ponca 
Tribal Council.

Section 7. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in possession of the Tribe from any 
source; shall be under bond with a Surety Company of recognized standing in an amount to be 
determined by the Ponca Tribal Council, shall keep an accurate record of all such funds and shall 
disburse the same in accordance with the vote of the Ponca Tribal Council and as designated by 
this Constitution; shall keep the books containing the financial status of the Tribe open to audit 
and examination by the Secretary of Interior of the United States of America or his designee at 
all times. All financial records shall be open to inspection by members of the Tribe as provided 
by ordinance to be adopted by the Ponca Tribal Council. Clerical staff shall be provided to 
the Treasurer by the Ponca Tribal Council to assist in the accurate keeping of financial records 
of the Tribe.

Section 8. The presiding chairs of all committees created by the Chair shall report directly to 
the Ponca Tribal Council unless otherwise provided in the creation of said committee.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - MEETINGS

 
 Section 1. General Membership meetings or Ponca Tribal Council meetings of the Tribe may 
be held as noticed at least ten (10) days in advance by the Chairperson of the Ponca Tribal 
Council. Executive Committee meetings shall be held monthly as provided in Article X, 
Section 2 upon three days notice to be given by the Chair. Special Meetings of the Council or 
General members may be held at the discretion of the Chairperson or upon request of five (5) 

members of the Ponca Tribal Council or upon the presentation of a petition to the Chairperson 
of the Ponca Tribal Council signed by at least ten (10%) percent of the members from each 
District eligible to vote. Except for General Members meetings, three (3) days written notice 
for Special Ponca Tribal Council meetings shall be given to all Ponca Tribal Council members. 
Members and Council Members may participate in meetings or conduct meetings through the use 
of any means of communications by which all persons participating in the meeting can 
simultaneously hear each other during the meeting. Participation by such means shall constitute 
presence in person at a meeting.

Section 2. Five members of the Ponca Tribal Council shall constitute a quorum to transact 
business at any meeting. Each member of the Ponca Tribal Council shall sign his name in 
his/her own handwriting signifying their presence at each meeting or shall verbally request the 
Secretary of the meeting to show their presence if they are participating by means of 
telecommunications. The Chair shall be counted as a member when determining a quorum to 
transact business at any time.

Section 3. All Ponca Tribal Council Meetings and General Members Meetings shall 
be conducted pursuant to this Constitution and Resolutions approved and adopted by the 
Ponca Tribal Council.

Section 4. The meetings of the Ponca Tribal Council shall be public to the Ponca Tribal 
members. The meetings shall adhere to an agenda set in advance. In appropriate instances 
the Ponca Tribal Council may by motion and majority vote conduct executive sessions outside 
of public hearing. General and Special Council Meetings and General Members meetings shall 
be held at the Tribe’s Headquarters or at such other specified location to be designated in the 
call or notice.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - LAND

 
 Section 1. All lands, including heirship lands, within the jurisdiction of the Ponca Tribe of 
Nebraska shall continue to be held as before by their present owners. No right of condemnation 
of lands owned by the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska is granted to any other governmental agency 
without the express approval of the Ponca Tribal Council. It is further recognized that under 
existing law individually owned lands may be inherited by the heirs of the present owner, 
whether or not they are members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. The right of the individual 
Ponca People to hold his or her land, as under existing law, shall not be abrogated by anything 
contained in this Constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America, voluntarily convey his or her land to 
the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska either in exchange for a money payment or in exchange for a lease 
covering the same land or other land, as hereinafter provided.

Section 2. Lands of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska and all lands which may hereafter be acquired 
by the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska or by the United States of America in trust for the Ponca Tribe 
of Nebraska shall be held as Tribal lands, and no part of such lands shall be mortgaged, 
exchanged, or sold, except as authorized by Federal Law.

Section 3. Tribal lands as are not required for school or other administrative use may be leased 
by the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska to members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska, or may be leased 
or otherwise used by the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska as hereinafter provided for.

Section 4. Lands may be leased by the Ponca Tribal Council with the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior of the United States of America if required by Federal Law. Preference in 
granting leases shall be given, first, to Ponca Tribal cooperative associations, and secondly, to 
individual members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. No lease of Tribal lands to a nonmember 
shall be made by the Ponca Tribal Council unless it shall appear that no Ponca Tribal cooperative 
association or individual member of the Tribe is able and willing to use the land and to pay a 
reasonable fee for such use.

Section 5. No member of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska may use or occupy Tribal lands except 
under an approved lease entered into by the Ponca Tribal Council.

Section 6. Unleased land shall be managed by the Ponca Tribal Council for the benefit of the 
members of the entire Tribe. Management of unleased tribal land will be in conformity with the 
rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America, 
if required by Federal Law.

Section 7. Tribal funds may be used to acquire land for the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska for the 
benefit of its members.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - TRIBAL IMMUNITY

 
 Section 1. The Tribe shall be immune from suit in any civil actions, the Ponca Tribal Council, 
Tribal officers, and employees shall be immune from suit for any civil liability arising from the 
performance of their official duties.

Section 2. In any action otherwise authorized by this Constitution by or against the Tribe or 
its officers or employees arising from the performance of their official duties, the following rules 
and procedures shall apply:

(a)  Neither the Tribe nor its officers or employees when involved in a civil action 
arising from the performance of their official duties shall be liable for the payment 
of the costs or expenses of the opposing party.

(b)  Neither the Tribe nor its officers or employees when involved in a civil action 
arising from the performance of their official duties shall be required to post a 
security bond for any purpose.

Section 3. The following limitations on the bringing of civil actions will apply:

(a)  Any action against the Tribe or its officers or employees arising from the 
performance of their official duties must be commenced within one year of the date 
the cause of action accrued.

(b)  Any action against the Tribe or its officers derivative of lease of Tribal land must 
be commenced within six (6) years of the date the cause of action accrued.

(c)  Any action against the Tribe or its officers alleging intentional torts shall be 

commenced within one (1) year of the date the cause of action accrued.

(d)  Any other action against the Tribe or officers must be commenced within two (2) 
years of the date the cause of action accrued, provided, however, that any cause of 
action based on fraud or mistake shall not be deemed to have accrued until the 
aggrieved party has discovered the facts constituting the fraud or mistake.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV SAVINGS - SEVERABILITY

 
 All previous resolutions, legislation, laws and acts taken by The Interim Council on behalf of the 
Ponca Tribe of Nebraska that are consistent with the limitations, powers, duties and obligations 
of this Constitution are ratified and shall remain as valid acts of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska.

In the event a Court of competent jurisdiction should hold an Article or any part of this 
Constitution as invalid the remainder of the Constitution shall be in full force and effect. It is 
the intention for each portion of this Constitution to be severable from any invalid portion of 
the Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - AMENDMENT

 
 Section 1. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of Interior to call an election by the members 
on a proposed constitutional amendment upon receipt of a written resolution of the Ponca Tribal 
Council signed by at least six (6) members of the Ponca Tribal Council. This Constitution shall 
be amended if a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska voting at 
an election called for the purpose by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America 
or his designee approve said amendment, provided that at least thirty (30%) percent of those 
entitled to vote shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall 

have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America or his 
designee, if required by Federal law.

Section 2. It shall also be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of 
America or his designee to call an election by the members on any proposed amendment to the 
Constitution upon receipt of a petition signed by forty (40%) percent of the persons 18 years or 
older who are members of the Tribe. Said amendment shall become effective if voted on and 
approved as provided in Article XV, Section 1 herein.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority of the qualified voters of the Ponca Tribe of 
Nebraska, voting at a special election called for this purpose by the Secretary of the Interior 
of the United States of America, provided that at least thirty (30%) percent of those entitled 
to vote shall vote in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, and if approved it shall be effective from the date of execution of 
approval of this Constitution by the Secretary of the Interior or his designee.

This Constitution shall, upon its adoption by the members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska, 
and validation of its adoption by the Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America 
shall supersede any and all prior Constitutions and amendments thereto of the Ponca Tribe 
of Nebraska.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs on 
APRIL 19, 1994 the foregoing Constitution of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska was
submitted to the registered voters of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska and was on 
duly adopted by a vote of 277 for, and 8 against, and
June 24, 1994 
0 cast ballots found spoiled or multilated in an election in which at least thirty-percent 
(30%) of the 319 members entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 
of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended.

Date: June 28, 1994
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, Patrick A, Hayes, Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue of the 
authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as 
amended, and delegated to me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve the Constitution of the 
Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. This Constitution is effective as of this date; PROVIDED, That 
nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under this document that 
would be contrary to Federal law.

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: JUL 22 1994

