 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE

PONCA TRIBE OF INDIANS 


 
  
 OKLAHOMA.

RATIFIED SEPTEMBER 20, 1950 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1951
 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE PONCA TRIBE OF 
INDIANS OF OKLAHOMA

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Ponca Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma, in 
order to promote our common welfare and to secure to ourselves and 
our descendants the rights, powers, and privileges offered by the Okla
homa Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do establish 
this organization and adopt the following Constitution and Bylaws 
pursuant to that act.

Article I—Name

The name of this organization shall be the Ponca Tribe of Indians 

of Oklahoma.

Article II—Membership of Tribe

Section 1. The membership of the Ponca Tribe of Indians of Okla 

homa shall consist of the following persons:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood who were enrolled or were entitled 
to be enrolled on the official census roll of the Ponca Tribe as of Janu
ary 1, 1940, provided that within five years after the adoption of this 
Constitution and Bylaws the said roll may be corrected by the Business 
Committee of the Ponca Tribe, subject to the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior.

(b)  All children of one-fourth or more Ponca Indian blood born 
since the date of said roll, one of whose parents is a member of the 
Ponca Indian Tribe.

Sec. 2. The Business Committee shall have power to prescribe rules 
and regulations, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Inte
rior, governing future membership including adoptions and loss of 
membership.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Ponca Tribe of Indians shall 
be a Business Committee consisting of seven members elected by vote 
of the tribal membership. The term of office of each committeeman 
shall be two years from the date of installation in office except as pro
vided for in Section 1 (a) of Article IV.

Sec. 2. In case their successors shall not have been duly elected and 
certified, the term of office of the committeemen shall be extended until 
successors shall have been duly elected and certified.

Sec. 3. The Business Committee so organized shall elect from within 
its own membership (1) a chairman, (2) a vice chairman, and from 
within or without, (3) a secretary-treasurer, and may appoint or 
employ such other officers and committees as may be deemed necessary.

Article IV—Elections

Section 1. The first election of the Business Committee hereunder 
shall be called, held, and supervised by the present Business Committee 
within 60 days after ratification of this Constitution and Bylaws.

(a) In the first election the four candidates receiving the highest 
number of votes shall hold office for two years. The three candidates 
receiving the next highest number of votes shall hold office for one year. 
Thereafter, committeemen shall be elected for a term of two years.

Sec. 2. All members of the Ponca Tribe of Indians twenty-one years 

of age or over shall be eligible to vote.

Sec. 3. The time and place of voting shall be designated by the 
Business Committee, or if the Business Committee shall fail to make 
such designation, the time and place shall be the same as in the last 
prior election.

Sec. 4. All tribal elections shall be by secret ballot to be held in 
accordance with rules and regulations laid down by the Business Com
mittee or by an Election Board appointed by the Business Committee.
Sec. 5. The Business Committee or an Election Board appointed 
by the Committee shall certify to the election of the members of the 
Committee within five days after the election has been held.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a committeeman or officer shall die, resign, be re
moved or recalled from office, or shall be found guilty by any Indian, 
State or Federal Court of a felony or misdeameanor involving dis
honesty or of accepting a bribe, or moves away from the locality of 
the Ponca jurisdiction, or fails to attend meetings for a period of 
six months in succession, the position shall be deemed vacant and the 
committee shall call an election to fill the unexpired term.

Sec. 2. The Business Committee by four affirmative votes may expel 
any committeeman for neglect of duty or gross misconduct in relation 
to his official duties. Before any vote for expulsion is taken the ac
cused shall be given a written statement of the charges against him 
at least five days before the meeting before which he is to appear 
and must be given an adequate opportunity to answer any and all 
charges at such Business Committee meeting. The decision of the 
Business Committee shall be final.

Sec. 3. Upon receipt of a petition signed by at least one-third of 
the eligible voters of the Ponca Tribe of Indians calling for the recall 

of any member of the Business Committee, it shall be the duty of 
the Business Committee to call a special election to consider the recall 
of the member or members of the Business Committee named in such 
petition. If a majority of those entitled to vote shall favor the recall 
of a member of a Business Committee and if at least twenty-five per
cent of those entitled to vote shall actually vote in such election, the 
office shall be declared vacant and the Business Committee shall call 
an election to fill the vacancy for the unexpired term.

Article VI—Meetings

Section 1. The regular meetings of the Business Committee shall 
be held on the first Tuesday of February, May, and November, unless 
otherwise provided by resolution.

Sec. 2. Special meetings of the Business Committee may be called 
by the chairman at his discretion and shall be called by him upon 
the written request of three members of the Business Committee.

Sec. 3. Annual meetings of the tribal membership shall be held on 
the second Tuesday in May for the purpose of receiving reports and 
transacting any other business which may come regularly before 
the tribe.

Sec. 4. Special meetings of the tribe may be called at the discre
tion of the chairman and shall be called by him upon the written 
request of a majority of the Business Committee or upon the written 
request of twenty-five members of the tribe, provided, that at least 
ten days’ notice shall be given in each instance.

Sec. 5. The principal object of a special tribal meeting must be 
stated in the notice and may include the words “and for the trans
action of any other business that may be presented.” Unless these 
words are added no other business can be transacted except for the 
object stated in the notice.

Article VII—Bill of Rights

Section 1. All members of the Ponca Tribe of Indians of Okla
homa shall enjoy without hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, 
speech, press, assembly, and association.

Sec. 2. This Constitution shall not in any way be construed to alter, 
abridge, or otherwise jeopardize the rights and privileges of the Ponca 
Tribe as citizens of the State of Oklahoma or of the United States.
Sec. 3. The individual vested property rights of any member of 
the Ponca Tribe shall not be altered, abridged, or otherwise affected 
by the provisions of this Constitution and Bylaws without the consent 
of such individual member of the tribe.

Article VIII—Powers of the Ponca Business Committee

The powers to be exercised by the Ponca Business Committee shall 
be set forth in a Corporate Charter to be issued by the Secretary of 
the Interior.

Article IX—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and the attached Bylaws may be 
proposed by four affirmative votes of the Business Committee or by a 
petition signed by at least twenty-five percent of the adult members 
of the tribe, and if approved by the Secretary of the Interior, shall 
be submitted to a referendum vote of the adult members of the tribe 
and shall be effective if approved by a majority vote of the adult 
members of the tribe voting in person, provided that at least thirty 
percent of the qualified members parti cipate in the election.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE PONCA TRIBE OF INDIANS

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman.—The chairman shall preside at all meetings 
of the tribe and of the Business Committee. He shall have general 
supervision of the affairs of the tribe and of the Business Committee 
and shall perform all duties pertaining to the office of chairman.

Sec. 2. Vice Chairman.—In the absence or incapacity of the chair
man, the vice chairman shall perform the duties of that office. In 
the case of a vacancy in the office of chairman, the vice chairman 
shall succeed at once to the office of chairman until the next special 
or regular election for the office of chairman, when the Business 
Committee shall organize itself in accordance with Article III, Section 
3. of the Constitution.

Sec. 3. Secretary-Treasurer.—The secretary-treasurer shall keep an 
accurate account of all proceedings and official records of the tribe 
and of the Business Committee. He shall make out the order of 
business for the chairman, shall notify all committees of their ap
pointments and shall have custody of the records and all tribal papers. 
All official records of the secretary-treasurer shall be available for 
inspection in the presence of the secretary-treasurer to any member 
of the tribe. He shall keep a correct list of all the members of the 
tribe, shall certify all accounts or orders of the tribe and of the 
Business Committee, and in the absence of the chairman and vice 
chairman shall call the meeting to order until a chairman pro tem 
is selected. He shall render a written report at the regular meeting 
of the Business Committee and at the annual meeting of the mem
bers of the tribe. At the expiration of his term of office he shall 

turn over the records, papers, and tribal funds in his possession to 
his successor. He shall issue notices of meetings and conduct general 
correspondence as directed by the tribe or by the Business Committee. 
He shall receive all monies of the tribe and keep an accurate account 
of receipts and disbursements.

The secretary-treasurer shall keep all tribal monies entrusted to 
his care in a special account and shall disburse such funds only upon 
written request of the Ponca Business Committee. Disbursements 
shall be by check. At any time that such an account shall amount to 
more than $50.00 he shall file a bond satisfactory to the Business 
Committee and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. The cost 
of such bond shall be paid out of tribal monies.

Article II—Qualification of Officers

Any person to be eligible for membership on the Business Com
mittee must be twenty-one years of age or older and an enrolled 
member of one-fourth or more Ponca Indian blood. At the time of 
his election he shall be an actual resident of the territory known as 
the old Ponca jurisdiction.

Article III—Place of Meetings

All regular and special meetings of the tribe or of the Business 
Committee shall be held at the Ponca subagency unless some other 
point is designated in the call or notice.

Article IV—Quorum

Section 1. Four members of the Business Committee shall consti
tute a quorum to transact business at any meeting. Each member 
of the Business Committee shall sign his name in his own handwriting 
signifying his presence at each meeting.

Sec. 2. Fifty adult members of the Ponca Tribe shall constitute 

a quorum at tribal meetings to transact business.

Article V—Adoption

This Constitution and Bylaws shall be effective when approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior and ratified by a majority vote of 
the members of the Ponca Tribe of Indians of Oklahoma voting at an 
election called by the Secretary of the Interior under rules and regu
lations prescribed by him pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma 
Indian Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), provided that 
at least thirty percent of the eligible voters vote in such election.

I, William E. Warne, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the 
United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by 

the act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), do hereby approve the at
tached Constitution and Bylaws of the Ponca Tribe of Indians of 
Oklahoma.
[seal] 

William E. Warne,

. 

Washington, D. C., May 23, 1950.

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved May 23, 1950, by the Assistant Sec
retary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and Bylaws was sub
mitted for ratification to the members of the Ponca Tribe of Indians 
of Oklahoma and on September 20, 1950, duly adopted by a vote of 
129 for, and 24 against, pursuant to Section 3 of the Oklahoma Indian 
Welfare Act of June 26, 1936 (49 Stat. 1967), and the regulations of 
the Secretary of the Interior, as modified in a memorandum to the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs dated April 6, 1951.

Ponca Tribal Election Board, 
Parrish Williams,

Dana A. Knight,

Mitchell Roy,

John L. Johnson,

Judge.

Cleric.

Registrar.

District Agent,
Pawnee Subagency.

Wm. Wade Head,

General Superintendent,

Western Oklahoma Consolidated Agency.

