 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE 

PONCA TRIBE OF NATIVE AMERICANS 

OF NEBRASKA


 
  
  
 APPROVED APRIL 3, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 

 
 GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE; 

WASHINGTON : 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION OF THE PONCA TRIBE OF NATIVE 
AMERICANS OF NEBRASKA

PREAMBLE


We, the Ponca Tribe of Native Americans of the State of Ne
braska, in order to promote peace, prosperity, happiness, and the 
general welfare of our people and our posterity, to exercise home 
rule, to conserve and perpetuate all worthy traditions and cultural 
elements of our people established by long custom, to improve our 
social order, to promote our economic welfare, to promote domestic 
tranquillity, to promote business enterprises both cooperative and 
individual, to provide educational opportunities for our people, to 
consolidate our land holdings by purchase, exchange, transfer, gift, 
or otherwise, to solve the problem of the fragmentation of our lands 
by inheritance, do ordain and establish this constitution and bylaws 
in accordance with the act of Congress, dated June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984).

Article I—Territory

Section 1, The territorial jurisdiction of the Ponca Tribe under 
this constitution and bylaws shall extend to all restricted individual 
Indian or tribal lands within the Ponca Reservation of Nebraska as 
described by metes and bounds in the treaties of March 12, 1858 (12 
Stat. 997), and March 10, 1865 (14 Stat. 675), and shall cover all, 
future additions within or without said boundary lines acquired by 
the Ponca Tribe of Native Americans or by the United States and 
held in trust for said tribe or its members.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska shall 

consist as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear or are en
titled to appear on the official census roll of the Ponca Tribe of 
Nebraska as of April 1, 1934, with the supplement thereto of Jan
uary 1, 1935, provided that within two years from the adoption and 
approval of this constitution and bylaws, additions and eliminations 
may be made in said roll and supplement by the board of governors 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  All children born to any member of the Ponca Tribe of Ne
braska who is a resident of the Ponca Reservation at the time of the 
birth of said children.

(c)  All children of any member who is not a resident of the reser
vation at the time of the birth of said children may be admitted to 
membership by the board of governors under ordinances made by 
the board of governors and subject to review by the Secretary of

the Interior, provided such children reside on the reservation at 
the time they make application.

Sec. 2. Continuous absence from the reservation, except for pur
poses of education, for a period of five years shall operate to termi
nate membership in the tribe, unless the board of governors shall, 
upon application from the nonresident member within said five-year 
period, extend the membership of such individual.

Sec. 3. The board of governors shall have power to promulgate 
ordinances subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, govern
ing future membership, including adoptions and the loss of 
membership.

Sec. 4. Request for adoption of persons of Indian blood, not 
members of the tribe, may be made by written application to the 
citizenship committee, who shall upon proper investigation, make 
their recommendations to the board of governors, who in turn will 
submit the matter of adoption or rejection of such applicant to a 
vote of the people at the next annual election.

Sec. 5. Upon the adoption of this constitution and bylaws by the 
people and the approval thereof by the Secretary of the Interior, 
notice of such adoption and approval and of this article shall be 
given by mail or publication to all nonresident members of the 
Ponca Tribe of Nebraska. All such members, so notified, must evi
dence by application or letter, within one year, their desire to con
tinue to be members of the tribe and participate in the tribal or
ganization; otherwise they shall forfeit their membership in the 
tribe under this constitution and bylaws. Such member forfeiting 
his membership may be adopted into membership as provided in 
section 4.

Sec. 6. The administration of the foregoing powers, and of all 
bylaws and ordinances affecting tribal membership, shall be vested 
in a citizenship committee. The act of such committee shall be sub
ject to review by the board of governors.

Sec. 7. Nothing contained in this article shall be construed to 

deprive any Ponca Indian of any vested right.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. A governing body of nine members, to be known as 
the board of governors shall be elected by popular vote of the people 
for a term of three years.

Sec. 2. The first election shall be called and held within thirty 
days after the adoption and approval of this constitution, and shall 
be conducted by a provisional committee selected by the present 
tribal council under such rules and regulations as the tribal council 
may prescribe.

Sec. 3. The first board of governors shall be elected in the follow
ing manner: Three members until the first regular election on the 
third Tuesday of November 1936, three members until the second 
regular election on the third Tuesday of November 1937, and three 
members until the third regular election on the third Tuesday of 
November 1938. After the election in November 1936 three members 
shall be elected to the board of governors annually on the third 

Tuesday of November for a term of three years. All outgoing elec
tive officers shall be eligible for reelection to succeed themselves.

Sec. 4. The board of governors in their first meeting after elec
tion of new members, shall elect from their membership one presi
dent, one vice president, one secretary and one treasurer, who shall 
hold office for a term of one year or until their successors are elected.
Sec. 5. The board of governors shall appoint all necessary sub

ordinate officers, boards, and committees.

Article IV—Powers

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The board of governors shall 
exercise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by 
the Constitution or statutes of the United States, and subject further 
to all express restrictions upon such powers contained in this consti
tion and the attached bylaws.

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local Governments 
on behalf of the tribe and to advise and consult with the representa
tives of the Interior Department on all activities of the Department 
that may affect the Ponca Reservation.

(b)  To employ counsel for the protection and advancement of the 
rights of the tribe and its members, the choice of counsel and fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets, which may be 
authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the Commis
sioner of Indian Affairs, or any other qualified official or agency of 
government, provided that no reservation lands shall ever be leased 
for a period exceeding ten years, sold, or encumbered, except for 
governmental purposes.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
tribe prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 
Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To make assignments of tribal land to members of the tribe 
and to regulate the leasing of assignments in conformity with article 
VIII of this constitution.

(f)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the tribe 
in accordance with the terms of a charter which may be issued to the 
tribe by the Secretary of the Interior. 

(g)  To appropriate for public purposes of the Ponca Tribe of 
Nebraska available funds within the exclusive control of the tribe, 
and subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, any other 
available tribal funds.

(h)  To levy taxes upon members of the tribe and to require the 
performance of reservation labor in lieu thereof, and to levy taxes 
or license fees, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
upon nonmembers doing business within the reservation; provided, 
however, that any such assessment upon members of the tribe shall 
have the approval of the eligible voters of the tribe at a special elec
tion, at which thirty per cent of the eligible voters shall vote.

(i)  To purchase lands of members of the tribe for public purposes, 
under condemnation proceedings in courts of competent jurisdiction.

.

(j)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and gen
eral welfare of the tribe by regulating the conduct of trade and the 
use and disposition of property upon the reservation, provided that 
any ordinance directly affecting nonmembers of the tribe shall be 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, and provided 
further that nonrestricted property of members which was obtained 
outside of any help or assistance of the Government or the tribe may 
be disposed of without restrictions.

(k)  To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal, 
other than allotted lands within the territory of the Ponca Reserva
tion, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(1)  To regulate the manner of making nominations for tribal of

fices and of holding elections.

(m)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the board 

of governors itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials.

(n)  To encourage and foster the arts, crafts, traditions, and cul

ture of the Ponca Tribe of Native Americans.

(o)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to regulate the activities of such cooperative associations of mem
bers of the tribe, under ordinances which shall be subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior.

(p)  To protect and preserve the property, wildlife, and natural 

resources of the tribe.

(q)  To delegate to subordinate boards, or tribal officials, or to co
operative associations which are open to all members of the tribe, 
any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review any ac
tions taken by virtue of such delegated power.

Sec. 2. Any resolution or ordinance, which, by the terms of this 
constitution is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
shall be presented to the superintendent of the reservation, who shall, 
within ten days thereafter, approve or disapprove the same. If the 
superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, it shall 
thereupon become effective, but the superintendent shall transmit a 
copy of the same, bearing his indorsement, to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may, within ninety days from the date of enactment, 
rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by notifying 
the board of governors of such decision.

If the superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within ten days of its enactment, he 
shall advise the board of governors of his reasons therefor. If these 
reasons appear to the board of governors insufficient, it may, by a 
majority vote refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of 
the Interior, who may, within ninety days from the date of its en
actment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance 
or resolution shall become effective.

Sec. 3. Future powers.—The board of governors may exercise such 
further powers as may in the future be delegated to the tribe by the 
Secretary of the Interior, or by any duly appointed official or agency 
of the State or Federal Government.
Sec. 4. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested
in the Ponca Tribe of Native Americans, but not expressly referred 
to m this constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may 
be exercised by the people of the Ponca Tribe of Native Americans, 

through- the adoption of appropriate bylaws and constitutional 
amendments.

Article V—Elections

Section 1. All recognized members of the Ponca Tribe of Native 
Americans, twenty-one years of age and over, and who have main
tained residence within the reservation for a period of six months 
immediately prior to the date of election shall be qualified voters.

Article VI—Removal

Section 1. The removal from office of a member of the board of 
governors shall be as follows: In the event of a complaint in writing 
charging improper conduct or gross neglect of duty from twenty- 
five members of the tribe against a member of the board of governors, 
the board of governors shall meet in executive session to consider 
such complaint and hear testimony of the accused. The board of 
governors, if satisfied of the truth of the complaint, may remove the 
accused member from the board of governors by a vote of six of the 
board members.

Sec. 2. Temporary vacancies in the board of governors by reason 
of death, removal from office, forced absence, or resignation shall 
be filled by said board until the next annual election when his 
successor shall be elected for the unexpired term.

Article VII—Referendum

Section 1. Any exercise of any enumerated powers lodged in the 
board of governors shall be subject to a referendum vote of the 
people upon a written petition signed by not less than 25% of the 
total number of voters in the last annual election, provided that not 
less than 30% of the eligible voting population shall vote in any 
such referendum.

Article VIII—Land

Section 1. Allotted lands, including heirship lands, within the 
Ponca Reservation shall continue to be held as heretofore by their 
present owners. It is recognized that under existing law such lands 
may be condemned for public purposes, such as roads, public build
ings, or other public improvements, upon payment of adequate com
pensation by any agency of the State of Nebraska or of the Federal 
Government or by the tribe itself. It is further recognized that under 
existing law such lands may be inherited by the heirs of the pres
ent owner, whether or not they are members of the Ponca Tribe. 
Likewise, it is recognized that under existing law the Secretary 
of the Interior may, in his discretion, remove restrictions upon such 
land, upon application by the Indian owner, whereupon the land 
will become subject to State taxes and may then be mortgaged or 
sold. The right of the individual Indian to hold or to lose his land, 
as under existing law, shall not be abrogated by anything contained 
in this constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily convey his 

land to the Ponca Tribe either in exchange for a money payment 
or in exchange for an assignment covering the same land or other 
land, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 2. Tribal lands of the Ponca Tribe and all lands which may 
hereafter be acquired by the Ponca Tribe or by the United States 
in trust for the Ponca Tribe shall be held as tribal lands, and no 
part of such lands shall be mortgaged or sold.

Sec. 3. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to individual Indians, 
but such tribal lands as are not required for school, agency, or other 
administrative use may be assigned by the board of governors to 
members of the Ponca Tribe, or may be leased or otherwise used by 
the tribe as hereinafter provided for.

Sec. 4. Tribal lands may be leased by the board of governors with 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior in accordance with 
law. Preference shall be given, first, to Indian cooperative associa
tions, and, secondly, to individual Indians who are members of the 
Ponca Tribe. No lease of tribal lands to a nonmember shall be made 
by the board of governors unless it shall appear that no Indian 
cooperative association or individual member of the tribe is able and 
willing to use the land and to pay a reasonable fee for such use.

Sec. 5. In any assignment of tribal lands which are now owned 
by the tribe or which may hereafter be acquired for the tribe by the 
United States or purchased by the tribe out of tribal funds, or 
which may be designated for the use of the tribe, preference shall 
be given, first, to heads of families which are entirely landless, and 
secondly, to heads of families which have no allotted lands or inter
ests in allotted lands, but shall have already received assignments 
consisting of less than an economic unit of agricultural land or 
other land or interests in land of equal value, such economic unit 
to be determined by the board of governors in ordinances, which 
shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior or his 
designated representative. Assignments under this section shall 
be known as “standard assignments.”

No member of the tribe who may hereafter have the restrictions 
upon his land removed and whose land may thereafter be alienated 
shall be entitled to receive an assignment of land as a landless 
Indian.

The board of governors may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of $5.00 

on approval of an assignment made under this section.

Sec. 6. If any person holding a standard assignment of land shall 
for a period of two years fail to use the lands so assigned or shall 
use the land for any unlawful purpose, his assignment may be 
cancelled by the board of governors after due notice and oppor
tunity to be heard. Such land may then be available for 
reassignment.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a standard assignment his 
heirs or other individuals designated by him by written request 
shall have preference in the reassignment of the land, provided such 
persons are eligible to receive a standard assignment.

Sec. 7. Any member of the Ponca Tribe who owns an allotment 
of land or any share in heirship land or any deeded land may, with 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily transfer 
his interest in such land to the tribe and receive therefor an assignment 

in the same land or other land of equal value or he may 
receive a proportionate share in a unit of agricultural or other land.
Assignments made under this section shall be known as “exchange 

assignments.”

Sec. 8. Exchange assignments may be used by the assignee or 
leased by him to Indian cooperative associations, to individual mem
bers of the tribe, or if no individual Indian or Indian cooperative 
association is able and willing to lease the land at a reasonable fee, 
such assignments may be leased to non-Indians in the same manner 
as allotted lands.

Sec. 9. Upon the death of a holder of exchange assignment such 
lands shall be reassigned by the board of governors to his heirs or 
devisees, subject to the following conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
is not a member of the Ponca Tribe, except that a life assignment 
may be made to the surviving spouse or child of the holder of such 
assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
already owns or holds more than an economic unit of land. Such 
economic unit of land shall be determined by the board of governors.
(c)  Such land may not be subdivided into units too small for 
practical use. The board of governors shall determine the practical 
subdivision of the land in each case. If the land cannot be properly 
subdivided, the board of governors may issue to such heir or devisee 
a proportionate share in other lands or other interests in land of 
equal value.

(d)  If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment the same as other tribal lands.
Sec. 10. Improvements of any character made upon assigned land 
may be willed to and inherited by members of the Ponca Tribe. 
When improvements are not possible of fair division, the board of 
governors shall dispose of them under such regulations as it may 
provide for the benefit of such heirs. No permanent improvements 
may be removed from any tribal or assigned land without the con
sent of the board of governors.

Sec. 11. No member of the Ponca Tribe may use or occupy tribal 

lands except under an assignment or lease.

Sec. 12. Unassigned land shall be managed by the board of gov
ernors for the benefit of the members of the entire tribe in conformity 
with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the 
Interior under section 6 of the act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984).
Sec. 13. Tribal funds may be used, with the consent of the Secre

tary of the Interior, to acquire land for the Ponca Tribe.

Sec. 14. Applications for assignment of land shall be made in 
writing. Such applications shall be submitted to the board of gov
ernors at regular or special sessions. The application will be placed 
in the hands of a proper committee who will call the matter up for 
action at the next regular meeting of the board of governors. Any 
member of the tribe may object in writing to a proposed assignment. 
In the event of objection, the president of the board of governors 
shall set a date for a hearing, advising both the applicant and the 
objector. The action of the board shall be final.

The secretary of the board shall furnish the superintendent or 
other officer in charge of the agency a complete record of all action 
taken by the board on applications for assignment of land, and a 
complete record of assignments shall be kept m the agency office and 
shall be open for inspection by members of the tribe.

The board of governors shall draw up one or more forms for 
standard and exchange assignments, which shall be subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Article IX—Amendments

This constitution and bylaws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the Ponca Tribe voting at an election 
called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided 
that at least thirty (30) per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote 
in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until it 
shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior. It shall 
be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an election on 
any proposed amendment upon receipt of a written resolution of 
the board of governors signed by at least five of the membership of 
the board of governors.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE PONCA TRIBE OF NATIVE AMERICANS OF 
NEBRASKA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The president of the board of governors shall preside 
at all meetings of the board. He shall also be the presiding officer 
at any general council meeting. He shall at all times have general 
supervision of the affairs of the board of governors and such mat
ters as naturally pertain to the general welfare of the community. 
It shall also be the duty of the president to countersign all checks 
against funds of the organization by the treasurer. He shall vote 
only in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. The vice president shall preside at all meetings of the 
board of governors in the absence of the president and shall act in 
his stead m all matters pertaining to the office of president.

Sec. 3. The secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceed
ings of the board of governors and furnish copies thereof to the 
Superintendent and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He shall 
attend to the keeping of the official records of the board of governors 
and shall be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all 
correspondence pertaining to the business of the board of governors 
and the tribe. All official records of the tribal secretary shall be 
open to inspection by the members of the tribe at all times.

Sec. 4. The treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in posses
sion of the tribe from any source. He shall be under bond with a 
surety company of recognized standing in an amount to be deter
mined by the board of governors, such surety company and bond 
to be approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He shall 
keep an accurate record of all such funds and shall disburse the same 
in accordance with the vote of the board of governors and as designated 

by this constitution and bylaws. The books of the treasurer 
containing the financial status of the tribe shall be open to audit and 
examination by the duly authorized officers of the Secretary of the 
Interior at all times.

The records of the treasurer shall be open to inspection by members 

of the board of governors and its officers.

Sec. 5. The subordinate officers, boards, and committees of the 
board of governors shall perform such duties as the board of gov
ernors shall, by resolution, from time to time provide.

Article II—Qualifications of Office

Section 1. Any person elected to membership in the board of gov
ernors shall be not less than twenty-five (25) years of age, a member 
of the Ponca Tribe of Native Americans, and a bona fide resident of 
the territory of the tribe for at least one year prior to election.

Article III—Oath of Office

Section 1. All officers when elected shall be duly installed and 
subscribe to an oath of office to support the Constitution of the 
United States and this constitution. Such officers may be sworn in 
by any officer qualified to administer an oath.

Article IV—Salaries

Section 1. Salaries of tribal officials shall not be paid from tribal 
funds nor changed in amount unless approved by the tribe at an 
election.

Sec. 2. The members of the board of governors, boards, and com
mittees shall be paid for expenses incurred in the interest of the 
community out of any available tribal funds when previously author
ized by the board of governors.

Article V—Meetings

Section 1. Stated meetings of the board of governors shall be 
held the first Friday in January, April, July, and October. Called 
meetings shall be held at the discretion of the president or upon 
request of three members of the board of governors. Three days’ 
written notice shall be given to all board members.
Sec. 2. Five members shall constitute a quorum.
Sec. 3. The board of governors shall prescribe such rules of order 

for their meetings as it desires.

Sec. 4. The meetings of the board of governors shall be public to 

the tribe except all executive sessions.

Article VI—Cooperation

Section 1. The board of governors shall work in very close coop
eration with the Indian Service and various departments of the 
State of Nebraska in matters of charity, education, recreation, social 
work, and public health, and in land assignments with the superin
tendent of the jurisdiction.

Article VII—Adoption of Constitution and Bylaws

This constitution and bylaws, when ratified by a majority of the 
qualified voters of the Ponca Tribe of Native Americans, voting at a 
special election called for the purpose by the Secretary of the In
terior, provided that at least (30) per cent of those entitled to 
vote shall vote in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of 
the Interior, and if approved, shall be effective from the date of 
approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved January 16, 1936, by the Secretary 
of the Interior, the attached constitution and bylaws was submitted 
for ratification to the members of the Ponca Tribe of Nebraska and 
was on February 29, 1936, duly ratified by a vote of 68 for, and 13 
against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of those entitled 
to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 
the act of June 15,1935 (Pub., No. 147, 74th Cong.)

Joseph J. Peniska, 
Chairman of Election, Board.

Peter LeClair,

Secretary of Election Board.

Gabe E. Parker,

Superintendent in Charge of the Reservation.

By virtue of the authority granted the Secretary of the Interior 
by the act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, I do hereby 
approve the attached constitution and bylaws of the Ponca Tribe 
of Nebraska.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution 
or bylaws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Ponca Tribe of 
Nebraska.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and bylaws.

Approval recommended March 27, 1936. 
John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

'

Washington, D. C., April 3, 1936.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.
[seal] 

