 
  
  
  
 CONSTITUTION 
 
OF THE
 
 PORT GAMBLE S'KLALLAM TRIBE 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe (previously known as the 
"Port Gamble Band of S'Klallam Indians," the "Port Gamble Band of Clallam Indians," 
and the "Port Gamble Indian Community"), a signatory to the Treaty of Point No Point, 
having organized under a Constitution and By-laws approved under the Indian 
Reorganization Act on September 7, 1939, as an exercise of fundamental sovereign 
authority do hereby establish this Constitution to:

Preserve for ourselves and our descendants our inherent sovereign rights and 
powers, all rights and powers reserved by the Tribe under the Treaty of Point No 
Point, the powers and benefits to which we are entitled under the Constitution 
and laws of the United States;

Advance the general welfare;

Safeguard our interests;

Sustain our rich cultural heritage and natural resources;

Secure our existence forever; and

Above all, protect and exercise our sovereignty and determine our own destiny.
 
 

ARTICLE I  - JURISDICTION

 
 The jurisdiction of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe shall extend over the 
following, to the fullest extent, except where prohibited by codes, statutes, ordinances 
or resolutions of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe ("Tribal Law") or applicable federal 
law:

A.  All persons, property and activities within: (1) the confines of the Port 

Gamble S'Klallam Reservation as established by Proclamation dated June 
16, 1938, and (2) such other lands as may hereafter be added thereto, and (3) 
other lands held by or acquired by the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe or for 
the benefit of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe; and

B.  All property interests in the lands specified in Article 1 A. including but not 
limited to surface, subsurface, air, water, and all natural resources; and

C.  Within the Tribe's usual and accustomed fishing grounds and stations and 

all open and unclaimed lands, reserved by the Tribe for fishing, hunting 
and gathering and on property used for access to fishing, hunting and 
gathering territories; and

D. 

To all persons, subjects and property that are, or may hereafter be, included 
within the jurisdiction of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE II  - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1. Membership. The membership of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe shall 
consist of:

A.  All persons whose names appear on the Basic Roll of the Port Gamble 

Indian Community as of January 1, 1939, approved on August 22, 1974 by 
the Bureau of Indian Affairs as such roll may be corrected from time to time 
by the Tribal Council in accordance with procedures approved by the 
General Council ("Basic Roll"); and

B.  A child born to a member of the Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe who, at the 

time of the birth of said child, is a resident of, (1) the Port Gamble S'Klallam 
Reservation, (2) lands held or acquired by the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe, 
or (3) any lands held or acquired by the United States for the benefit of the 
Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe; and

C.  A person who is a descendant of a member whose name appears on the 

Basic Roll and who is adopted into the Tribe by a majority vote of the 
eligible voters of the General Council under such additional criteria as 
provided under Tribal Law.

Section 2. Enrollment Laws. The Tribal Council shall have the power to promulgate 
laws governing membership, including but not limited to enrollment, relinquishment of 
enrollment, adoption, disenrollment, and the maintenance and correction of the rolls. 
The Tribal Council shall have the authority to act on applications for membership under 
Section l.B. The General Council retains exclusive authority to act on applications for 
adoption under Section l.C.

Section 3. No Dual Enrollment. No person who is an enrolled member of any other 
federally recognized Indian Tribe shall, at the same time, be a member of the Port 
Gamble S'Klallam Tribe. If a person who applies for membership in the Port Gamble 
S'Klallam Tribe is a member of another federally recognized Indian Tribe, he or she 
shall submit a written relinquishment of such membership subject to the approval of his 
or her application for membership in the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe.

ARTICLE III  — THE GENERAL COUNCIL

Section 1. Membership in the General Council. The General Council shall be 
composed of all eligible voters of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe, as defined in Section 
2 of this article.

Section 2. Eligible Voters. All members of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe who are 
eighteen (18) years of age or older are eligible to vote in all tribal elections and to 
participate in all open tribal meetings.

Section 3. Meetings. The General Council shall hold semi-annual meetings on the 

last Saturday of March and the first Saturday of October.' The Tribal Council, or twenty- 
five percent (25%) of the eligible voters, by verified signatures, may, by written notice, 
call special meetings of the General Council.

A.  Notice. At least thirty (30) days notice of the semi-annual meetings, and at 
least seven (7) days notice of special meetings, shall be provided by the 
Tribal Council to members of the General Council who are eligible to vote. 
Notices shall be mailed or delivered to each tribal member household on the 
Port Gamble S'Klallam Reservation and either mailed to each member 
living off the Reservation or published in the Tribe's newsletter. Tribal 
members are responsible for notifying the Tribe of changes of address.

B.  Agenda. The agenda for General Council meetings shall be set by the Tribal 
Council; provided that any member may submit to the Tribal Council items 
for the semi-annual meeting agenda, in writing, within time limits set by the 
Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall preside over and the Tribal Council 
Chairperson shall chair General Council meetings.

Section 4. Quorum. Thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters shall constitute a 
quorum. The number of registered voters for the purpose of this section shall be 
determined by calculating the average number of persons who voted in the last three 
Tribal Council elections.

Section 5. Powers of the General Council. The General Council shall retain all 
governing authority of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe that is not delegated to the 
Tribal Council or to the Courts of the Tribe under this Constitution. These retained 
powers include but are not limited to:

A.  Elect Tribal Council members as provided under this Constitution.

B.  Adopt persons as members of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe under 
Article I, Section l.C. of this Constitution and in conformity with 
procedures set out under Tribal Law.

C.  Take final tribal action concerning the termination or alienation of the 

Tribe's real property, whether owned by the Tribe in fee or held in trust by 
the United States for the Tribe.

D.  Make advisory recommendations to the Tribal Council through a majority 

vote.

E.  Exercise the power of legislative initiative under procedures set out under 

Tribal Law.

F.  Exercise the power of recall of Tribal Council members under procedures 

set out under Tribal Law.

G.  Delegate any of its powers to the Tribal Council or subordinate tribal

organizations.

H.  Decide by majority vote whether to banish a member, as provided under 

Tribal Law.

I.  Amend this Constitution, in accordance with Article VII.

Section 6. Future Powers. The General Council may exercise such further powers as 
may in the future be delegated to it by any duly authorized official or agency of the 
State or Federal government and, if consistent with such delegation, may further 
delegate such powers to the Tribal Council or subordinate tribal organizations in 
accordance with Section 5.G.

Section 7. Reserved Powers. Any rights and powers vested in the Port Gamble 
S'Klallam Tribe but not expressly referred to in this Constitution, and any inherent 
tribal powers not expressly delegated by the General Council in this Constitution, shall 
not be abridged by this Article, but may be exercised and delegated by the General 
Council without amendment to this Constitution.

ARTICLE IV — THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

Section 1. Composition of the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall consist of the 
Chairman, Vice-Chairman, Tribal Council Person I, Tribal Council Person II, Tribal 
Council Person III and Tribal Council Person IV. Three members shall constitute a 
quorum of the Tribal Council.

Section 2. Elections and Term of Office.

A.  Tribal Council elections shall be held in July each year under procedures set 

forth under Tribal Law.

B.  The Chairman, Tribal Council Person II, and Tribal Council Person III shall 

hold office for a term of two (2) years and shall stand for election in odd 
numbered years. The Vice-Chairman, Tribal Council Person I, and Tribal 
Council Person IV shall hold office for the term of two (2) years and shall 
stand for election in even numbered years.

C.  The members of the Tribal Council who are in office at the time of the 

effective date of this Constitution shall remain in office for the term for 
which they were elected.

D.  The position known as the Secretary under the previous Constitution shall 

automatically become the Tribal Council Person I, the position known as 
Treasurer shall automatically become the Tribal Council Person II, the 
position known as Business Committee Person-at-Large shall automatically 
become the Tribal Council Person III and the position known as the Non
voting Business Committee Person-at-Large shall automatically become the 
Tribal Council Person IV.

Section 3. Enumerated Powers. The General Council hereby delegates to the Tribal 
Council the following powers, which the Tribal Council shall exercise subject to any 
limitations imposed by this Constitution and applicable federal law:

A.  Enact laws governing conduct of all persons and entities and defining 
offenses against the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe; maintain order and 
protect the health, safety and welfare of all persons within the Tribe's 
jurisdiction; and enact laws necessary to govern the administration of 
justice and the enforcement of all laws and regulations of the Tribe;

B.  Regulate the social and domestic relations of persons and provide for the 
protection of minors and legally incompetent persons within the Tribe's 
jurisdiction;

C.  Enact laws governing tribal membership and to act upon applications for 

membership, pursuant to Article II, Section 2 of this Constitution;

D.  Prescribe and enforce the conditions upon which non-tribal members may 

enter and remain on the Tribe's land and to establish procedures for the 
exclusion of non-tribal members and for the extradition of persons accused 
of crimes in other jurisdictions;

E.  Prescribe and enforce the conditions upon which a tribal member would be 

banished on a temporary or permanent basis from the Tribe's land, 
provided that any permanent banishment shall be imposed only upon 
approval of a majority vote of the General Council;

F. 

Enact laws and regulations for the conduct and administration of all tribal 
elections, for removal and recall of Tribal Council members and for 
enactment of legislation through an initiative process;

G.  Regulate and define the duties of the Tribal Council consistent with the 

duties set forth in this Constitution;

H.  Negotiate and enter into treaties, compacts, contracts and agreements on 

behalf of the Tribe with other governments and their officers and agencies 
and with public and private persons and entities;

I. 

Establish, regulate, define the duties of, and appoint persons to tribal 
boards, groups, and committees unless otherwise limited by this 
Constitution;

J. 

Establish policies and procedures for employment with the Tribe;

K.  Raise revenue, including the power to levy and collect taxes and license 

fees;

L. Authorize expenditures and appropriate funds;

M.  Borrow money and use such funds for the benefit of the Tribe; pledge, 

mortgage or assign tribal assets or income due or to become due, provided 
that the Tribal Council shall not have the power to mortgage land held in 
trust for the Tribe by the United States;

N.  License and regulate the conduct of business activities and establish 

business enterprises wholly or partially owned by the Tribe;

O. 

Issue charters of incorporation, charter corporations and other 
organizations for economic or other purposes, and regulate the activities of 
such tribally chartered entities;

P.  Acquire and purchase lands and regulate land use;

Q.  Approve or deny any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal land 

or assets, consistent with Section 3.M;

R.  Regulate the inheritance of property within the jurisdiction of the Tribe and 

provide for property belonging to persons who die intestate and without 
ascertainable heirs to become the property of the Tribe;

S.  Develop, manage, protect and regulate the use of all the Tribe's natural 

resources wherever situated;

T. 

Protect the Tribe's spiritual, ceremonial, cultural and burial sites and 
property wherever situated;

U.  Employ legal counsel on behalf of the Tribe;

V.  Grant express, written, limited waivers of the Tribe's sovereign immunity;

W.  Assert the Tribe's sovereign immunity as a defense to lawsuits or other legal 

proceedings initiated against the Tribe, the Tribal Council and those tribal 
employees or agents acting on behalf of the Tribe, and assets of the Tribe;

X.  Exercise any power or duty which may now or in the future be delegated to 
it by the General Council or which may be confirmed by court decision; and

Y.  Take any and all actions necessary for the exercise of the foregoing powers 
and duties and all other powers and duties hereafter delegated to or vested 
in the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - JUDICIAL POWER

 
 The judicial power of the Tribe shall be vested in the Port Gamble S'Klallam 

Tribal Court and the Port Gamble S'Klallam Court of Appeals. Qualifications, terms, 
appointment and removal of judges and the jurisdiction of the Court shall be set forth 
under Tribal Law adopted by the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VI  - INDIVIDUAL RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

 
 The Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe has existed since time immemorial, surviving 
under adverse conditions, because its customs, values and traditions support the well 
being of the community as a whole. Individual freedom is treasured but carries with it 
the individual responsibility to ensure the survival of the Tribe.

The Tribal Council is vested with the responsibility to execute its powers and 

duties in a manner that protects the Tribe's sovereignty and the health, welfare, safety 
and well-being of the tribal community as a whole, while respecting individual 
freedoms. When balancing the interests of individuals against the needs of the tribal 
community, the Tribal Council shall strive to provide an opportunity for individuals to 
be heard and to render its decisions with fairness, in keeping with the values of the Port 
Gamble S'Klallam Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. This Constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the eligible 
voters of the General Council, who vote at an election called for the purpose; provided, 
that at least thirty percent (30%) of the registered voters cast votes in such election.

Section 2. At any regular or special General Council meeting, amendments to tliis 
Constitution may be proposed to be acted upon at the next semi-annual General 
Council meeting. If approved by a majority vote at such meeting, the Tribal Council 
shall call an election upon the proposed amendment, under procedures set forth under 
Tribal Law.
 
 

CERTIFICATION

WE, THE UNDERSIGNED MEMBERS OF THE ELECTION COMMITTEE, 

 
 HEREBY CERTIFY that on July 8, 2013, there was an election, which included an 
amendment to the Constitution of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe.

WE FURTHER CERTIFY that the foregoing text of the Constitution has been 

duly adopted under the laws of the Port Gamble S’Klallam Tribe.

Rose E. Purser, Election Committee Chair

Julia V. Anderson, Election Committee Member

PORT GAMBLE S'KLALLAM TRIBE 
 
 
CONSTITUTIONAL AMENDMENT 
CERTIFICATION

WE, THE UNDERSIGNED MEMBERS OF THE ELECTION COMMITTEE, 
 
 HEREBY CERTIFY that on July 8, 2013, there was an election, which included an 
amendment to the Constitution of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe. The amendment 
changed the meeting dates of the General Council in Article III, Section 3 of the 
Constitution. The Tribal Council proposed changing the meeting dates at the 
October 17, 2009 special meeting and the January 23, 2010 regular meeting of the 
General Council. The proposal to amend the meeting dates was voted on by the 
General Council at the June 26, 2010 and June 30, 2012 meetings. The General 
Council approved the proposal on January 26, 2013. On June 24 and July 1, 2013, 
notification of the July 8, 2013 election and a sample ballot to amend the 
Constitution was published in the Community Memo.

WE FURTHER CERTIFY that of all of the members of the Port Gamble 

S'Klallam Tribe eligible to vote in the July 8, 2013 election, 155 eligible voters voted 
at the polls, with 13S in favor and 20 against the constitutional amendment.

WE FINALLY CERTIFY, that the first sentence of Article HI, Section 3 of 

the Constitution of the Port Gamble S'Klallam Tribe, in accordance with Article IV of 
said Constitution and Title 11 of the Tribe's Law and Order Code, was duly amended 
to read as follows:

"The General Council shall hold semi-annual meetings on the last Saturday of 
March and the first Saturday of October."

Rose E. Purser
Election Committee Chair

Julia V. Anderson
Election Committee Member

Georgia Makris
Election Committee Member

Ronald G. Charles
Election Committee Member

