 
 i I 
 

UNITED STATES 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

PORT GAMBLE INDIAN COMMUNITY 

WASHINGTON


 
  
  
 APPROVED SEPTEMBER 7, 1939 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1939 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE PORT GAMBLE 

INDIAN COMMUNITY, WASHINGTON

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Port Gamble Band of Clallam Indians, 
in order to establish a legal community organization and secure 
certain privileges and powers offered to us by the Indian Reorgani
zation Act, do ordain and establish this Constitution and By-laws 
for the Port Gamble Indian Community.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Port Gamble Indian Community shall 
extend to the territory within the confines of the Port Gamble 
Reservation as established by Proclamation dated June 16. 1938. and 
to such other lands as may hereafter be added thereto under any 
law of the United States, except as otherwise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Port Gamble Indian Community 

shall consist of:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood who are members of the Port 
Gamble Band of Clallam Indians whose names appear on the official 
census roll as of January 1, 1939, provided that such roll may be 
corrected by the Community Council, with the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior, within two years after approval of this 
Constitution and By-laws; and

(b)  All children born to any member who is a resident of the 
Port Gamble Indian Community at the time of the birth of said 
children.

Sec. 2. The governing body shall have the power to promulgate 
ordinances subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, govern
ing future membership and the adoption of new members when the 
resources of the Community make such adoptions feasible.

Article III—The Governing Body
Section 1. The governing body of the Port Gamble Indian Com
munity shall be the Community Council, which shall be composed 
of all qualified voters of the Port Gamble Band of Clallam Indians. 
A majority of the eligible voters shall constitute a quorum.

Sec. 2. The Community Council shall elect from its own members 
by secret ballot (a) a chairman, (b) a vice-chairman, (c) a secretary, 
(d) a treasurer, and (e) such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary

Sec. 3. The Community Council shall meet on the first Monday of 

January and July.
 
 

 
 
 Sec. 4. Within sixty days after the ratification and approval of 
this Constitution and By-laws, the Community Council shall be 
called for the purpose of electing the officers named herein, and 
it may transact such other business as may be necessary. The officers 
elected at this meeting shall serve until the July meeting, at which 
time their successors shall be chosen. Thereafter, officials shall be 
chosen at the July meeting.

Sec. 5. The Chairman, or 25 per cent of the qualified voters, may by 

written notice, call special meetings of the Community Council.

Sec. 6. The Business Committee shall consist of the chairman, 
vice-chairman, secretary, and treasurer of the Community Council, 
and shall perform such duties as may be authorized by that Council.
Article IV—Powers or the Community Council

Section 1. Enumerated Powers.—The Community Council of the 
Port Gamble Indian Community shall exercise the following powers, 
subject to any limitations imposed by the Statutes or the Consti
tution of the United States:

(a) To negotiate with the Federal, State and local governments.
(b) To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 
fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of tribal 

lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets.

(d)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Community prior to submission of such estimates to the Bureau of 
the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Port 
Gamble Indian Community in accordance with the terms of a charter 
that may be issued to the Community by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior governing the conduct 
of members of the Port Gamble Indian Community: providing for 
the manner of making, holding and revoking assignments of tribal 
land or interests therein; providing for the levying of taxes and 
the appropriation of available funds of the Community for public 
purposes; providing for the licensing of nonmembers coming upon 
the reservation for purposes of hunting, fishing, trading, or other 
business, and for the exclusion from the territory of the Communitv 
of persons not so licensed and establishing proper agencies for the 
enforcement of such ordinances upon the reservation.

(g)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents by ordinance or resolution, subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(h)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, 
and to delegate to such organizations, or to any subordinate boards 
or officials of the Community, any of the foregoing powers, reserving 
the right to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated 
power.

(i) To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and attached By-laws regulating the procedure of the Community

Council and of other Community organizations of the Port Gamble 
Indian Community.

Sec. 2. Future Powers.—The Community Council may exercise 
such further powers as may in the future be delegated to it by the 
Secretary of the Interior, or any other duly authorized official or 
agency of the State or Federal government.

Sec. 3. Reserved Powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Port Gamble Band of Clallam Indians but not ex
pressly referred to in this Constitution, shall not be abridged by 
this Article, but may be exercised by the members of the Port Gamble 
Indian Community through the adoption of appropriate by-laws 
and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 4. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance, which 
by the terms of this Constitution shall be subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent 
in charge of the reservation, who shall, within ten days thereafter, 
approve or disapprove the same. If the Superintendent shall approve 
any ordinance or resolution, it shall thereupon become effective, but 
the Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his 
endorsement, to the Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety 
days from the date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or 
resolution for any cause, by notifying the Community Council of 
such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any ordinance or 
resolution submitted to him within ten days after its enactment, 
he shall advise the Community Council of his reasons therefor. If 
these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by majority 
vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the In
terior, who may, within ninety days from the date of its enactment, 
approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or 
resolution shall become effective.

Article V—Bill of Rights

Section 1. Suffrage.—All members of the Port Gamble Band of 
Clallam Indians over the age of twenty-one (21) years shall have the 
right to vote in all Community elections.

Sec. 2. Economic Rights.—All members of the Community shall 
be accorded equal opportunities to participate in the economic 
resources and activities of the Community.

Sec. 3. Civil Liberties.—All members of the Community shall 
enjoy without hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, 
press, assembly, and association.

Article VI—Amendments

Section 1. This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by 
a majority vote of the qualified voters of the Community, voting 
at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior: 
Provided, That at least 30 per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote in 
such election, but no amendment shall become effective until it shall 
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 2. At any regular or special Community Council meeting, 
amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be proposed to 

be acted upon at the next semiannual Community Council meeting. 
If approved by a majority vote at such meeting, the proposed amend
ment shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, who shall 
thereupon call an election upon the proposed amendment.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE PORT GAMBLE INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 Article I

It shall be the duty of the Chairman to preside over all meetings of 
the Community Council and carry out all orders of the Council. 
All members of the Council and all subordinate officers shall assist 
the Chairman in all proper ways to carry out the orders of the 
Council.

Article II

The Community Council Secretary shall keep a full report of all 
proceedings of each regular and special meeting of the Community 
Council and of the Business Committee, and shall perform such other 
duties of like nature as the Community Council shall from time to 
time by resolution provide, and shall transmit copies of the minutes 
of each meeting to the Superintendent in charge of the reservation 
and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Article III

The Community Council Treasurer shall be the custodian of all 
moneys which may come under the jurisdiction or into the control 
of the Community Council. He shall pay out money in accordance 
with the orders and resolutions of the Community Council. He 
shall keep account of all receipts and disbursements, and shall report 
the same to the Community Council at each regular meeting. He 
shall be bonded in such an amount as the Community Council may 
by resolution, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, 
provide. The books of the Council Treasurer shall be subject to audit 
or inspection at the direction of the Community Council or the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Until the Treasurer is bonded, the 
Business Committee may make such provision for the custody and 
disbursement of funds as shall guarantee their safe and proper 
disbursement and use.

Article IV

The subordinate officers of the Community Council shall perform 
such duties as the Community Council may from time to time provide 
by resolution.

Article V

It shall be the duty of the Community Council and each member 
thereof to promote the general welfare of members of the Com
munity, and to carry out the provisions and purposes of this 
Constitution and By-laws.

Article VI

Each officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of 
office prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall 

pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States and this Constitution and By-laws:

Oath: “I, _____________________ , do solemnly swear that I will
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against 
all enemies; that I will carry out faithfully and impartially the duties 
of my office to the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote, 
and protect the best interests of my people, in accordance with this 
Constitution and By-laws.”

Article VII

The order of business at any regular or special meeting of the 

Community Council shall be as follows:
1.  Call to order by the Chairman.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
4.  Reports of committees.
5.  Report of the Treasurer.
6.  Reading of communications.
7.  Unfinished business.
8.  New business.
9.  Adjournment.

Article VIII

The Community Council shall have the power to elect delegates 

to sit in a Central General Council of Northwest Indians.

Article IX

Ratification of Constitution and By-Laws.—This Constitution and 
By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote of the voters of the Port 
Gamble Band of Clallam Indians voting at a special election called 
by the Secretary of the Interior in which at least 30 per cent of those 
entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of 
the Interior for his approval, and shall be in force from the date 
of such approval.

Certification of Adoption

Pursuant to an order, approved July 6, 1939, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Port Gamble Band 
of Clallam Indians and was on August 5, 1939, duly ratified by a 
vote of 32 for, and 7 against, in an election in which more than 
30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance 
with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

(S.) Harry Fulton, Jr.,

Chairman, Election Board.

(S.) Cyrus Webster,

Secretary, Election Board.

(S.) O. C. Upchurch,

Superintendent, Tulalip Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted 
me by the act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Port Gamble 
Indian Community in Washington.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
and By-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to the members of the 
Port Gamble Indian Community.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended June 15, 1939.

Fred H. Daiker,

Assistant to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D.C., September 7, 1939.

Assistant Secretary of the Interior
[seal]

Oscar L. Chapman,

