 
  
 CONSTITUTION OF THE POTTER VALLEY TRIBE 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Potter Valley Tribe, pursuant to our inherent sovereignty as a nation, do 
hereby adopt and establish this Constitution for the purposes of providing for the health, safety, 
and welfare of our people, to promote our economy, to preserve, protect, and pass on our culture 
to future generations, to maintain community harmony, to achieve fairness and justice, to honor 
our traditions, our ancestors, and our elders, to assert and exercise our sovereignty, to affirm and 
build our territorial base, to acquire land and water for future generations, to protect the cultural 
and natural resources of our aboriginal land or any other acquired territory, to carry on 
enterprises for the benefit of our community, and to establish duties and rights of the citizens of 
the Potter Valley Tribe living on or off-reservation.
 
 

ARTICLE I - JURISDICTION

 
 The governmental authority of the Potter Valley Tribe extends to all matters and conduct 
occurring within the exterior boundaries of acquired lands of the Potter Valley Tribe, to any 
interests in the ancestral or other tribal lands and resources of the Potter Valley Tribe, including 
but not limited to the exercise of water, fishing, hunting, gathering, and environmental 
management rights; and over the members of Potter Valley Tribe wherever situated The Potter 
Valley Tribe asserts its full governmental authority and any authority granted to it by the federal, 
state, or local governments presently or in the future.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 The membership of the Potter Valley Tribe shall consist of:

(a)  Persons who vote in the election to adopt this Constitution, and who are 

not members of any other federally recognized tribe.

(b)  Lineal descendents of persons designated in subsection (a) who are at least 
eighteen (18) years old, whose applications for membership have been 
approved by the General Council, and who are not members of any other 
federally recognized tribe.

(c)  Biological children of persons designated in subsections (a) and (b) who 
are under eighteen (18) years old whose parents or legal guardians have 
filed applications for membership on their behalf and whose applications 
have been approved by the General Council.

(d)  Any person determined to be a Potter Valley Indian by an enrollment 
committee established by the Tribal Council, pursuant to Article IV, 
Section 8(c) of this Constitution and whose application has been approved 
by the Potter Valley General Council. The burden of satisfying 
membership requirements specified in the Tribal Enrollment Ordinance 
shall be on the person seeking membership.

(e)  Any person who has not formally relinquished membership in another 
federally recognized tribe will not be eligible for enrollment with the

Potter Valley Tribe.

(f)  All membership applications shall be subject to approval by the General 

Council pursuant to the Tribal Enrollment Ordinance
 
 

ARTICLE III  - GENERAL COUNCIL

 
 The General Council of the Potter Valley Tribe shall consist of all Potter Valley Tribal members 
who are at least eighteen (18) years of age.
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. 

General Statement.
The Tribal Council is the governing body of the Potter Valley Tribe

Section 2. 

Composition.
The Tribal Council shall be composed of:

1. 
2. 
3. 

Chairperson.
Secretary.
Treasurer

Section 3. Decisions.

All decisions of the Tribal Council shall be passed by a simple majority vote of 
the members of the Tribal Council

Section 4. 

Terms.
(a) 

Initial terms.

The first election of the Tribal Council shall be held at least sixty (60) 
days, but not more than ninety (90) days after the adoption of this 
Constitution by the Potter Valley Tribe and approval of the Constitution 
by the Secretary of the Interior

In order to ensure staggered terms the following Initial Terms will be as 
follows:
1. 
2. 
3. 

four (4) years
two (2) years
four (4) years

Chairperson: 
Secretary: 
Treasurer: 
Subsequent terms

Upon expiration of the Initial Terms, elections of the members of the 
Tribal Council shall be for four (4) year terms

(b) 

(c) 

Any vacancy on the Tribal Council shall be filled by appointment by the 
Tribal Council if there is less than one (1) year remaining in the term of 
office for the vacant position The vacancy shall be filled by the winner of 
a Special Election called for the purpose of filling the vacancy if there is 
one (1) year or more remaining in the term of office for the vacant 
position

Section 5. 

Qualifications
Candidates for and members of the Tribal Council shall:

(a) 
(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

Be a member of the Potter Valley Tribe.
Be at least eighteen (18) years old at the time of filing a petition to run for
office in the election
Be willing and able to travel to Tribal Council meetings and other 
functions of the Tribal Council
Have not been convicted of any felony, including but not limited to: 
assault, theft, fraud, violence, or a sex or drug related offense, in the last 
three (3) years prior to the day of election in which he/she is a candidate 
for office, unless the conviction was for a juvenile offense

Section 6. 

Removal.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

The Tribal Council may remove a member of the Tribal Council if he/she 
is convicted of any felony, including but not limited to: assault, theft, 
fraud, violence, or a sex or drug related offense while serving his/her term 
of office.
A member of the Tribal Council subject to removal shall be afforded due 
process of law including

1. Adequate notice of the proposed removal action.
2.  A hearing before the Tribal Council or designated Tribal Court at 
which the member subject to removal may present evidence on his/her 
behalf.
3.  Opportunity to have a representative present in all proceedings
The specific provisions for a hearing and the rights guaranteed to those 
subject to removal shall be set forth in an ordinance enacted by the Tribal 
Council subject to approval by the General Council
If a Tribal Council member has been removed from office, that person 
shall not run for office for four (4) years.

Section 7. Recall.

(a) 

(b) 

A member of the Tribal Council shall be subject to a recall vote if a 
petition, signed by at least two thirds (2/3) of the General Council stating 
the reasons for the proposed recall is submitted to the Election Board
A member of the Tribal Council shall be recalled by a simple majority 

vote of the General Council in a special election called pursuant to the 
Election Ordinance.
If a Tribal Council member has been recalled from office, that person shall
not run for office again for four (4) years.

(c) 

Section 8. Duties.

The Tribal Council shall:
(a) 

Enact ordinances not specified under Section 9 of this Constitution that are 
deemed necessary, all of which are subject to approval by the General 
Council.
Hire a Tribal Administrator.
Enact an ordinance establishing regulations and procedures governing 
enrollment including the establishment of an Enrollment Committee, 
subject to approval by the General Council.
Appoint the Enrollment Committee in accordance with the ordinance 
passed pursuant to subsection (c).
Enact an ordinance establishing regulations and procedures governing 
elections including the creation of an Election Board, subject to approval 
by the General Council.
Appoint an Election Board in accordance with the ordinance passed 
pursuant to subsection (e).
Reconsider any Tribal Council decision in which the Tribal Council 
receives a petition for revoking or amending that Tribal Council decision 
pursuant to Article VII.
Present to the General Council, at informational meetings to be convened 
on the first Saturday in April and first Saturday in October, a report on the 
general state of Tribal affairs.
Meet at least once a month.

(b) 
(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

(f) 

(g) 

(h) 

(i) 

Section 9. Powers

The Tribal Council shall:
(a) 

Appoint executive boards, committees or create offices as deemed 
necessary.
Purchase land for the Tribe, subject to approval by the General Council.
Administer Tribal property.
Develop and enforce ordinances pertaining to the use and development of 
Tribal lands and resources.
Prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of Tribal lands, 
interest in lands, or other Tribal assets, except as authorized by the 
General Council.
Enact ordinances to regulate the environment and natural resources.
Enact ordinances to regulate hunting, fishing, and water rights.
Enact ordinances to impose taxes, licenses, and use fees on all persons 
subject to the jurisdiction of the Potter Valley Tribe.

(b) 
(c) 
(d) 

(e) 

(f) 
(g) 
(h) 

(i) 
(j) 

(k) 

(1) 

Enact ordinances to regulate commerce and trade.
Provide for the safety, health, and welfare of the Potter Valley Tribe by 
enacting ordinances governing the conduct of all persons subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Potter Valley Tribe.
Enact ordinances regulating banishment and exclusion of all persons 
subject to the jurisdiction of the Potter Valley Tribe.
Enact ordinances regulating domestic relations of all persons subject to the 
jurisdiction of the Potter Valley Tribe.

(m)  Negotiate with other governments on behalf of the Potter Valley Tribe
(n) 
(o) 

Negotiate contracts on behalf on the Potter Valley Tribe
Borrow money on behalf of the Potter Valley Tribe, subject to approval by 
the General Council.
Develop, or cause to develop, grant applications to Federal, State, and 
Local governments and other agencies.
Collect and expend Tribal funds
Create tribal corporations for the operations of economic enterprises to 
benefit the Potter Valley Tribe, pursuant to applicable law.
Employ legal counsel.
Establish a Tribal judiciary, appoint judges, or in the alternative choose to 
participate in the Intertribal Court of California or a tribal court forum of 
their choice
Take all actions necessary and proper for the exercise of the powers 
enumerated in this Constitution

(p) 

(q) 
(r) 

(s) 
(t) 

(u) 
 
 

ARTICLE V- EXECUTIVE OFFICERS

 
 Section 1. Tribal Chairperson.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Selection
The Tribal Chairperson shall be elected by a simple majority of those 
registered as set forth in the Election Ordinance to vote in the Tribal 
Council election.
Term.
The Tribal Chairperson’s term shall be four (4) years.
Duties.
The Tribal Chairperson shall:

1. 
2 

3. 

Preside over Tribal Council and General Council meetings
Subject to the approval of the Tribal Council, act as the contracting 
agent of the Potter Valley Tribe
Represent the Potter Valley Tribe when the General Council is not 
in session, subject to approval of the Tribal Council.

Section 2. Tribal Secretary

(a) 

Selection.

The Tribal Secretary shall be elected by a simple majority of those 
registered as set forth in the Election Ordinance to vote in the Tribal 
Council election.
Term.
The Tribal Secretary’s term shall be four (4) years, except that the Tribal 
Secretary’s initial term shall be two (2) years.

(b) 

(c) 

Duties.
The Tribal Secretary shall:

1. 

2. 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6. 
7. 

In the absence of the Tribal Chairperson, preside over 
Tribal Council and General Council meetings.
In the absence of the Tribal Chairperson, perform all the 
duties assigned to the Tribal Chairperson.
Keep, or cause to be kept the minutes of all General 
Council and Tribal Council meetings.
Attest to the enactment of all ordinances and resolutions 
regulated by the Constitution.
Receive and validate all petitions provided for in the 
Constitution on behalf of the Tribal Council.
Verify all notices required by the Constitution.
Perform other duties designated by the Tribal Council.

Section 3. Tribal Treasurer.

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

Selection.
The Tribal Treasurer shall be elected by a simple majority of those 
registered as set forth in the Election Ordinance to vote in the Tribal 
Council election.
Term
The Tribal Treasurer’s term shall be four (4) years.
Duties
The Tribal Treasurer shall:
1. 

Carry out the financial directives of the Tribal Council; receive or 
cause to be received monies of and for the Potter Valley Tribe; and 
keep or cause to be kept an accurate account of receipts and 
disbursements.
Deposit or cause to be deposited funds in the Potter Valley Tribe 
account.
Give or cause to be given a financial report at all regular General 
Council and Tribal Council meetings.
At the expiration of his/her term of office, all records and papers 
that are the property of the Potter Valley Tribe in his/her 
possession shall be turned over to his/her successor to the Tribal 
Council.

2. 

3. 

4. 
 
 

ARTICLE VI - TRIBAL JUDICIARY

 
 Section 1. 

Establishment
The Tribal Council of the Potter Valley Tribe shall establish a tribal court or in 
the alternative utilize the judicial services of the Intertribal Court of California or 
a tribal court forum of their choice Until the Potter Valley Tribal Court System is 
established, the Tribal Council may act as a dispute resolution forum

Section 2. 

Jurisdiction

The Tribal Court System of the Potter Valley Tribe shall exercise jurisdiction over 
all disputes arising within the exterior boundaries of the Potter Valley Reservation 
and over all persons subject to the jurisdiction of the Potter Valley Tribe

Section 3. 

Judicial Review and Judicial Independence

All challenges to this Constitution and/or challenges to any legislative enactments 
of the Potter Valley Tribal Council shall be within the exclusive jurisdiction of its 
Tribal Court System or its designated intertribal court system. The decisions of 
the judiciary shall be free from political entanglements and intervention of the 
Tribal Council and/or the General Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - PETITIONS TO REVOKE OR MODIFY

 
 Any General Council member may circulate a petition to revoke or modify any action or 
decision of the Tribal Council. Each page of the petition to revoke or modify shall describe the 
action or decision taken by the Tribal Council. Upon receipt of a petition to revoke or modify 
validated by the Tribal Secretary and signed by at least two-thirds (2/3) of the General Council, 
the Tribal Council shall hold a public hearing on the matter described in the petition within thirty 
(30) days. There shall be only one (1) petition per action or decision. A Special Election shall 
be held, pursuant to the Election Ordinance, to revoke or modify an action or decision after a 
public hearing
 
 

ARTICLE VIII  - INITIATIVES

 
 The General Council may propose any measure by a petition. Upon receipt of a initiative 
petition validated by the Tribal Secretary and signed by at least 1/3 of the General Council, the 
Election Board shall place the initiative on the ballot for the next election In the event that the 
next election is more than a year away, the Election Board shall call a Special Election. The 
initiative shall have the effect of legislation if it receives at least two-thirds (2/3) vote of those 
registered as set forth in the Election Ordinance to vote in the election
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. Election Board.

An Election Board appointed by the Tribal Council shall supervise and administer

all elections in accordance with the Tribal Election Ordinance enacted by the 
Tribal Council, subject to approval by the General Council.

Section 2. General Council

The General Council shall be composed of all the members of the Potter Valley 
Tribe who are at least eighteen (18) years old on the day of the election All 
members of the General Council shall be eligible to vote, provided that members 
comply with the voter registration process set forth in the Election Ordinance

Section 3. Ballots.

All elections shall be conducted by secret ballot The Election Board shall 
provide for in-person and absentee voting pursuant to Article IV, Section 8(e).

Section 4. 

Election Dates
(a) 

General Elections.
After the initial election and the expiration of the initial terms after the 
adoption and approval of this Constitution by the Secretary of the Interior, 
all general elections shall be held every two (2) years on the first Saturday 
of November and shall include elections of open Tribal Council seats, any 
initiatives submitted pursuant to Article VIII, and any Constitutional 
amendments submitted pursuant to Article XII, Section 1.
Special Elections
1. 

Initiatives and Amendments.
Special elections shall be held for voting on initiatives or 
amendments, pursuant to the Election Ordinance.
Recall.
Special Elections shall be held for recall of a member of the 
Tribal Council, pursuant to the Election Ordinance.

2. 

(b) 

Section 5. First Election

The first election for members of the Tribal Council shall be held at least sixty 
(60) days, but not more than ninety (90) days after the adoption and approval of 
this Constitution by the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

ARTICLE X - RIGHTS AND RESPONSIBILITIES

 
 Section 1. 

Section 2. 

Rights.
All rights of members of the Potter Valley Tribe are protected under the Indian 
Civil Rights Act as amended

Responsibilities.
All members of the Potter Valley General Council shall maintain a relationship 
with the Potter Valley Tribe pursuant to a General Council Responsibilities 
Ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

 
 The Potter Valley Tribe hereby declares that, in exercising self-determination and its sovereign 
powers to the fullest extent, the Potter Valley Tribe is immune from suit, except as specifically 
provided in writing by the General Council
 
 

ARTICLE XII- SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All enactments of the Tribe adopted before the effective date of this Constitution shall continue 
in full force and effect to the extent that they are consistent with this Constitution. If prior 
enactments are not consistent with this Constitution, this Constitution governs and the prior 
enactments are null and void to the extent of their inconsistency with this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII- AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. 

Section 2. 

Amendment Proposal
Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by resolution of the Tribal 
Council or by a petition validated by the Tribal Secretary and signed by two- 
thirds (2/3) of the General Council members.
Amendment Adoption
Adoption of any amendments to this Constitution shall take place by an election 
pursuant to the Election Ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - ADOPTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote at a special election called by the Secretary 
of the Interior in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters of the Tribe have 
voted, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior for approval, and shall be effective from 
the date of the Secretary’s approval.

Aduption/Rejection of the Constitution of the Potter Valley Rancheria

Certificate of Results of Election

Pursuant to an election authorized by the Acting Regional Director, Pacific Region, Bureau of

Indian Affairs on April 30, 2004 the enclosed Constitution of the Porter Valley Tribe was 

submitted to the qualified voters of the Potter Valley Rancheria and was on 

July 29,

  2004, duly

adopted by a vote of 6 “for” and 0 “against”, and cast ballots found to be 

spoiled or mutilated, in an election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those entitled to vote 

cast their votes; in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18,

1934, (18 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935, (49 Stat. 378).

Date: 7/29/04

Ernest Young,Chairman, Election Board

Date: 7/29/04

Salvador Rosales, Election Board Member

Date: 7/29/04

Rosemary Reales, Election Board Member
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 The Constitution of the Potter Valley Rancheria, California, which was adopted by the qualified 
voters of the Tribe on July 29, 2004, is hereby approved pursuant to the authority delegated to 
the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended and 
delegated to the Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs by 230 D.M. 2.4 and redelegated to me 
by Memorandum of Agreement dated August 16, 1994.

Date 9/8/04

Dale Risling, Sr., Superintendent 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
Central California Agency 
650 Capitol Mall, Suite 8-500
Sacramento, California 95814

Dear Mr. Risling:

This correspondence is to acknowledge the receipt of the formal results of the election conducted 
on July 29, 2004 by the qualified voters of the Potter Valley Rancheria. The election was 
conducted in accordance with the authorization issued on April 30, 2004 and pursuant to 
25 CFR  81.

As evidence by the Certificates of Results of Election, signed by the Election Board Members, 
the proposed Constitution was adopted by a vote of 6 “for” and 0 “against” and 0 cast ballots 
found to be spoiled or mutilated. Therefore, as evidenced by my signature on the enclosed 
Certificate of Approval, the proposed Constitution is approved pursuant to the authority 
redelegated to me by Memorandum of Agreement dated August 16, 1994.

By separate cover letter, please notify the Tribe and return the following original documents to 
the Tribe; this approval letter, the Certificate of Approval, the Certificate of Results of Election, 
the adopted Constitution, the September 23, 2002 authorization letter, and any other documents 
that would be appropriate for the Band to retain, such as the Potter Valley Membership List.

Returned herewith are the documents submitted with your August 6, 2004 memorandum. If you 
have any questions regarding this matter, please contact Fred Doka Jr., Acting Regional Tribal 
Operations Officer, at (916) 978-6067.

Sincerely

/s/ Clayton Gregory

Regional Director

Enclosures

cc: Assistant Secretary, Indian Affairs

Regional Solicitor, Pacific Southwest Region (without attachments)

TO/fdj/09/02/01/3702-P5/Potter Valley

