 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE PUEBLO OF
SANTA CLARA

NEW MEXICO


 
  
  
 APPROVED DECEMBER 20, 1935 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON: 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE PUEBLO OF 
SANTA CLARA, NEW MEXICO

PREAMBLE


We, the people of Santa Clara pueblo, in order to establish jus
tice, promote the common welfare and preserve the advantages of 
self-government, do ordain and establish this constitution.

Article I—Jurisdiction

This constitution shall apply within the exterior boundaries of 
Santa Clara pueblo grant and to such other lands as are now or may 
in the future be under the jurisdiction of the pueblo of Santa Clara. 
This constitution shall apply to and be for the benefit of all persons 
who are members of the pueblo of Santa Clara.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. Conditions of membership.—The membership of the 

Santa Clara pueblo shall consist as follows:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the cen
sus roll of the Santa Clara pueblo as of November 1, 1935, provided 
that within one year from the adoption and approval of this consti
tution corrections may be made in the said roll by the pueblo council 
with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  All persons born of parents both of whom are members of 

the Santa Clara pueblo.

(c)  All children of mixed marriages between members of the 
Santa Clara pueblo and nonmembers, provided such children have 
been recognized and adopted by the council.

(d)  All persons naturalized as members of the pueblo.

 Sec. 2. Naturalization.—Indians from other pueblos or reserva
tions who marry a member of Santa Clara pueblo may become mem
bers of the pueblo, with the assent of the council, by naturalization. 
To do this they must (1) go before the pueblo council and renounce 
allegiance to their tribe and declare intention of becoming members 
of the Santa Clara pueblo. They shall swear that from that date 
on they will not receive any benefits from their people, except 
through inheritance. (2) A year later they shall go before the 
pueblo council again, swear allegiance to the pueblo of Santa Clara 
and receive membership papers; provided, they have kept their 
promise from the time of their first appearance before the pueblo 
council.

Article III—Organization of the Pueblo Council

Section 1. Officers.—The governing power of the pueblo of Santa 
Clara shall be vested in the pueblo council which shall consist of the
following officers:

Officers: 

Number
Governor_____________________________— 
1
Lieutenant Governor_____________________  1
Representatives_________________________  8
Secretary______________________________  1
Treasurer______________________________  1
Interpreter_____________________________  1
Sheriff________________________________  1

and such other officers as the council may recognize or appoint.

Sec. 2.—Election of Governor, Lieutenant Governor, secretary, 
treasurer, interpreter, and sheriff.—On the first Saturday of each year 
an election shall be held within the pueblo of Santa Clara, at which 
a Governor, Lieutenant Governor, secretary, treasurer, interpreter, 
and sheriff shall be elected by secret ballot to serve for the ensuing 
year.

Sec. 3. Who may vote.—Every member of the pueblo of Santa 
Clara who is of sane mind and over 18 years of age, may vote at any 
election. Any member who is absent from the pueblo on the date 
of any election shall have the right to vote by mail under such rules 
as may be prescribed by the pueblo council.

Sec. 4. Candidates.—Candidates for Governor, Lieutenant Gov
ernor, secretary, treasurer, interpreter, and sheriff shall be nominated 
at least fifteen (15) days before the date upon which each election is 
to be held. Nominations for the first election shall be made by the 
recognized parties now existing within the pueblo. Thereafter, 
nominations shall be made in a manner prescribed by the council of 
the pueblo.

Sec. 5. Representatives.—Two representatives shall be appointed 
to the pueblo council upon the date of the first election, for a term 
of 1 year by each of the four recognized parties now existing within 
the pueblo, and in all future elections eight representatives shall be 
chosen in a manner to be prescribed by the council.

Sec. 6. Manner of elections.—All nominations for office and elec
tions shall be made and held in a manner prescribed by the council 
of the pueblo.

Article IV—The Pueblo Council and Its Powers

Section 1. Legislative power.—The legislative power shall be 
vested in the pueblo council, and the said power shall be exercised in 
accordance with, and not in conflict with, the constitution or any 
laws of the United States of America.

The pueblo council shall have the following rights and powers:
1. To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees 

to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

2.  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of pueblo 

lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets.

3.  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments, and 
with the councils and governing authorities of other pueblos or Indian 
tribes.

4.  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all appro
priation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the pueblo 
prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget 
and to Congress.

5.  To enact ordinances, not inconsistent with the constitution and 
bylaws of the pueblo, for the maintenance of law and order within 
the pueblo and for the punishment of members, and the exclusion 
of nonmembers violating any such ordinances, for the raising of 
revenue and the appropriation, of available funds for pueblo pur
poses, for the regulation of trade, inheritance, land-holding, and 
private dealings in land within the pueblo, for the guidance of the 
officers of the pueblo in all their duties, and generally for the protec
tion of the welfare of the pueblo and for the execution of all other 
powers vested in the pueblo by existing law: Provided, That any 
ordinance which affects persons who are not members of the pueblo 
shall not take effect until it has been approved by the Secretary of 
the Interior or some officer designated by him.

6.  To delegate any of the foregoing powers to appropriate officers 
of the pueblo, reserving the right to review any action taken by 
virtue of such delegated power.

Sec. 2. Judicial power.—The pueblo council shall also adjudicate 
all matters coming before it over which it has jurisdiction. In all 
controversies coming before the pueblo council, the council shall 
have the right to examine all witnesses and ascertain full details of 
the controversy, and after the matter shall have been sufficiently 
commented upon by the interested parties, the council shall retire 
to a private place to make a decision. All of the members of the 
council except the Governor and the Lieutenant Governor shall have 
the right to vote upon a decision, and a majority shall rule. In the 
event of a tie, the Governor shall have the right to cast a vote, 
thereby breaking the tie. It shall be the duty of the Governor 
and the Lieutenant Governor to express to the other members of the 
pueblo council their views regarding the case before a vote is taken.
Sec. 3. Common law of pueblo.—With respect to all matters not 
covered by the written constitution, bylaws, and ordinances of the 
pueblo of Santa Clara, nor by those laws of the United States of 
America which are applicable to the pueblo of Santa Clara, the 
customs and usages of the pueblo, civil, and criminal, as interpreted 
by the council, shall have the force of law.

Article V—The Governor, His Powers and Duties

The Governor shall be the executive head of the pueblo govern
ment. It shall be his duty to enforce the laws of the pueblo, civil 
and criminal, written and unwritten. If any person considers that 
any ruling of the Governor is unjust, he shall have the right to 
demand through any representative of the pueblo council or di
rectly to the pueblo council that the matter be brought before the 
pueblo council for adjudication at the next meeting of said officers.

In all community work the Governor shall be the sole overseer 
unless he is unavoidably absent, in which event the Lieutenant Gov
ernor shall have the same rights and duties as the Governor.

Article VI—Vacancies and Impeachments

Sec. 1. Vacancies.—Should any vacancy occur in any of the offices 
or any member of the council, the council shall, by a majority vote, 
have the right to name a successor for the said office, except that in 
the event the office of Governor becomes vacant for any reason, then 
and in that event the Lieutenant Governor shall thereupon become the 
Governor with all duties and powers of the said office, and further, 
that the successor to any pueblo representative appointed by a par
ticular group shall be chosen by the same group.

Sec. 2. Impeachment.—Any officer charged with grave offenses 
may be tried before the other members of the council. The manner 
of conducting impeachments shall be prescribed by the council. The 
council shall act as the trial court, and if they decide, by a two-thirds 
vote, to remove the accused member from office he will be removed.

Article VII.  —Land

Section 1. Pueblo title.—Title to all lands of the pueblo, whether 
assigned to the use of individuals or withheld for the common use 
of the members of the pueblo, shall forever remain in the pueblo 
itself and not in the individual members thereof. All the members 
of the pueblo are declared to have an equal right to make beneficial 
use, in accordance with ordinances of the council, of any land of the 
pueblo not heretofore or hereafter assigned to individual members.

For the purpose of this article the word “member” shall be defined 

by the council.

Sec. 2. Individual rights of possession.—The right of full posses
sion shall be guaranteed to every member of the pueblo, holding 
lands assigned to him by the Pueblo Council, for cultivation or other 
purposes: Provided, That no member holding said lands shall sell 
or will same to an alien. All lands assigned to individuals of the 
pueblo must be completely fenced within three years. Any viola
tion of the above provision shall be sufficient cause for the council 
to dispossess him of said land. He shall have the right, however, 
to rent to a pueblo member or, with the approval of the council, to an 
alien, all lands under his possession, for a term not to exceed two 
years. He shall have the right to sell his interest in said lands to 
any other member of the pueblo after his assignment has been finally 
approved, subject to such regulations as the council may prescribe.

Sec. 3. Council to have power of granting assignments.—When 
any member of the pueblo desires a piece of unimproved pueblo land, 
he shall select his land, and then make his application for same to 
the council of the pueblo. If the council decides to grant him the 
land, or any part thereof, they shall mark out the boundaries of 
same. The grantee shall thereafter have full possession of said 
land, unless the council shall, in accordance with the constitution, 
bylaws, and ordinances of the pueblo, dispossess him of the same.

Sec. 4. Prior assignments recognized.—All assignments of land 
heretofore made by the pueblo authorities are hereby recognized 
and confirmed.

Article VIII.  —Amendments

No amendments or changes shall be made in the constitution or 
bylaws of the pueblo except by a decision of the general pueblo. 
At the request of the council the Secretary of the Interior shall sub
mit any proposed amendment to the said constitution or bylaws to 
a vote of the people. If such amendment is approved by a majority 
of the qualified voters of the pueblo, 21 years old or over, voting 
at an election in which at least 30 percent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote, it shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and 
if he shall approve the same it shall become effective.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE PUEBLO OF SANTA CLARA, NEW MEXICO

 
 Article I.  —Duties of Officers

Section 1. Governor.—The Governor shall be in full charge of all 
meetings of the pueblo council. It shall be his duty to see that 
perfect order is preserved in every respect. In the discussion of all 
business but one person shall be allowed to speak at a time, and the 
Governor shall have the right to set a time limit upon speakers. 
When any member of the pueblo council or any other person de
sires to speak at a meeting of the pueblo council, such person shall 
first ask permission of the Governor to do so before proceeding. It 
shall be the duty of the Governor to see that all business presented 
to the council within any month be disposed of, if possible, before 
the beginning of the next month.

Sec. 2. Lieutenant Governor.—The Lieutenant Governor shall be 
next in rank to the Governor. In case of the death, resignation, 
absence, impeachment, or other disability of the Governor, the Lieu
tenant Governor shall become Governor or act as Governor during 
such disability or absence. As long as the Governor is at the pueblo 
holding office, the Lieutenant Governor shall have the power only 
of a representative in the council, except as otherwise provided in 
the constitution and bylaws of the pueblo.

Sec. 3. Representatives.—Representatives shall represent their 
people in the pueblo council. They shall bring before the council 
at every meeting the matters that their people want brought before 
the council and such other matters as each representative believes 
should be presented to the council. Such matters may originate 
with any member of the pueblo or may originate with the repre
sentative himself.

Sec. 4. Secretary.—The secretary shall keep a record of all coun
cil proceedings and all business authorized or transacted by the 
council. At the beginning of each regular meeting, he shall call the 
roll of councilmen and all specially summoned persons expected to 
be present He shall then read the minutes of the previous meeting 
and the officers shall then decide as to whether they should be ap
proved as they stand, and all persons present shall have the right 
to suggest corrections. After the minutes of the previous meeting 
have been accepted, the secretary will then mark them approved. 
The secretary shall attend to all official correspondence as directed 
by the pueblo council and the Governor.

Sec. 5. Treasurer.—It shall be the duty of the treasurer to receive 
all money due to the pueblo and to give a receipt for the same. He 
shall deposit the pueblo money in a bank which should be approved 
by the pueblo council. He shall keep a record in his books of all 
moneys received and paid out. Moneys of the pueblo shall be paid 
by check signed by the treasurer and countersigned by the Governor. 
No moneys shall be paid out unless the same shall have been author
ized to be expended by the council and vouchers for same shall have 
been signed by the Governor and the secretary. At each regular 
meeting of the pueblo council, the treasurer shall present to them a 
Statement of receipts and disbursements made by him since the last 
regular meeting and he shall submit to the pueblo council at each 
regular meeting all of his books and a statement of the financial 
condition of the pueblo funds.

Sec. 6. Interpreter.—The interpreter shall translate from the Tewa 
language into the English language or from English into the Tewa 
language whenever directed to do so by the pueblo council. He shall 
also assist the secretary with the official correspondence of the pueblo.
Sec. 7. Sheriff.—It shall be the duty of the sheriff to assist the 
Governor in keeping law and order in the pueblo. He shall main
tain order at all meetings, also in the village and on the pueblo 
lands. He shall report on disorders to the council. He shall have 
authority to stop trouble immediately wherever he finds it, without 
special authorization from the Governor. In case of disputes or 
difficulties the sheriff shall bring the parties in controversy before 
the council for a decision. He shall bring before the council for 
punishment all violators of the laws of the pueblo. He shall serve 
notices or summons upon all persons required to be present before 
the council in criminal or civil proceedings.

Article II.  —Qualifications of Office
Section. 1. Qualifications of Governor and Lieutenant Governor.— 
The Governor and the Lieutenant Governor must be at least twenty- 
five (25) years of age and shall not be over sixty-five (65) years of 
age. They must be members of the pueblo of Santa Clara and be 
residents of said pueblo at the time of their election. They must 
be able to speak the Tewa language fluently and also be able to speak 
either the English or Spanish languages well enough to be under
stood.

Sec. 2. Qualifications of representatives.—The representatives 
must be at least twenty-five (25) years of age. They must be mem
bers of the pueblo of Santa Clara and residents thereof at the time 
of their selection. They must be able to speak the Tewa language 
fluently.

Sec. 3. Qualifications of secretary, treasurer, and sheriff.—The 
secretary, treasurer, and sheriff must be not less than twenty-five 
(25) years of age and not over sixty-five (65) years of age. They 
must be members of the pueblo of Santa Clara and residents thereof 
at the time of their election. They must be able to speak the Tewa 
language fluently and speak, read, and write the English language, 
and it will be preferable to have those who can also understand the 
Spanish language.

Sec. 4. Qualifications of the Interpreter.—The interpreter shall 
be not less than twenty-five (25) years of age, and not over sixty- 
five (65) years of age, and must be a member of the pueblo of 
Santa Clara and a resident thereof at the time of his election. He 
must be able to speak the Tewa language fluently and to translate 
the said language into English and Spanish and the English and 
Spanish languages into the Tewa language.

Article III.  —Conduct of Council Meetings

Section 1. Regular meetings.—Regular meetings of the pueblo 
council shall be held at least once a month, at such time and place 
as shall be fixed by the council, and special meetings shall be held 
at such times and places as shall be fixed by the council. No action 
shall be taken by the council at any meeting unless at least a majority 
of the members are present.

Sec. 2. Attendance of council members.—Every member of the 
pueblo council shall be required to be present at each regular 
monthly meeting and at each special meeting of the pueblo council 
unless it should be impossible for such member to be there, in which 
event said member shall notify the Governor of his inability to 
attend, giving reasons therefor. The Governor will then refer the 
matter to the pueblo council who, if the reasons given are found to 
be justifiable, shall excuse the absence of the said member. In the 
event that members of the council receive compensation for their 
services from the pueblo funds, an unexcused absence shall be pun
ished by a fine to be fixed by the pueblo council.

Sec. 3. Matters of general interest to pueblo.—In all matters in 
which all of the people of the pueblo of Santa Clara are interested, 
the pueblo council shall cause the sheriff to notify all members of 
the pueblo of the time and place at which such business is to be 
transacted. At least three days’ notice of such general meeting of 
the pueblo council shall be given in such manner as shall be pre
scribed by the bylaws of the pueblo. If any member of the pueblo 
wants a special meeting for all the people in the pueblo, he will 
first get permission from the pueblo council through a representa
tive, or through the Governor.

Sec. 4. Special meetings on grievances.—If any member of the 
pueblo of Santa Clara has any grievance against any other member 
of the said pueblo which cannot await settlement at the regular 
pueblo council meeting, he shall report the same to the Governor 
who, if he deems that the case requires speedy attention, shall call 
a special meeting of the council at such time and place as the Gov
ernor shall fixate pass upon the said matter.

Sec. 5. Advice of counsel.—If any cause cannot be fully under
stood by the pueblo council, the pueblo council may consult the 
special attorney for the Pueblo Indians and ask for his advice.

Article IV—Personal Liberties

Section 1. Private rights of each member of the pueblo.—Each 
member of the pueblo of Santa Clara shall be assured his private 
rights as a citizen of the United States, and no attempt shall be made 

by the officers of the pueblo to enforce any order upon him depriving 
him of said rights.

Sec. 2. Preference to relatives.—Preference to relatives shall not 
be given by council members under any circumstances. If they 
clearly show preference they will be exposing themselves to im
peachment.

Sec. 3. Old members of the pueblo.—All members of the pueblo 
who have completed their 75th year shall not be compelled to work 
on community work (pueblo cleaning, fencing, etc.), and ditch work. 
If, however, they of their own accord attend to community work 
they will be free to work as they please.

Retired members will not, however, be able to fill the places of 
sons who are of working age and not justified in refusing to serve 
on community work and ditch work.

Article V—Intoxication

Any person showing signs of intoxication will not be allowed to 
take part in a council meeting. Council members who attend meet
ings while intoxicated or who have missed a meeting because of 
intoxication will face a charge of impeachment.

All liquor charges will be decided by the pueblo council and fines 

will be made by the council when cases come up before the council.

Article VI—Stock

From March 1 to November 1 of each year it shall be the duty of 
all members of the pueblo to report all loose animals found in culti
vated fields of the pueblo to the Governor. The Governor will then 
notify the owners. If they do not remove the animals from the fields 
at once, they will be subject to a fine. The fine will be made according 
to the amount of damage done. If the Governor cannot by himself 
settle a, question like this he will be free to bring the case before the 
pueblo council.

Article VII—Ratification

This constitution and bylaws, when ratified by a majority vote of 
the members of the pueblo over twenty-one years of age at a special 
election, called by the Secretary of the Interior, in which at least 
thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters shall vote, shall be sub
mitted to the Secretary of the Interior for his approval and shall be 
effective from the date of such approval. The constitution and by
laws of the pueblo may thereafter be amended or revoked in the 
manner provided under article VIII of the constitution.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 23, 1935, by the Sec
retary of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the Indians of the Santa Clara pueblo 
and was on December 14, 1935, duly adopted by a vote of 145 for 
and 8 against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of those 
entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of 

the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984k as 
amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (Pub., No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Patrici Gutierrez, 
Chairman of Election Board.

Cleto Tafoya,

Secretary of Election Board.

Nestor Naranjo.
John Naranjo.
Anastacio Naranjo.
Agapito Naranjo.
Jose G. Naranjo.
Joseph Filario Tafoya.
S. D. Aberle,

Superintendent in charge the United Pueblos Agency.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and by-laws of the pueblo of Santa Clara.
All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution 
or by-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the pueblo of Santa 
Clara.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended December 18, 1935.

John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., December SO, 1935.

