 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS 
OF THE PYRAMID LAKE 
PAIUTE TRIBE 

NEVADA


 
  
  
 APPROVED JANUARY 15, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1936 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE PYRAMID LAKE 
PAIUTE TRIBE OF NEVADA

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe of the Pyr
amid Lake Reservation in the State of Nevada, in order to es
tablish our tribal organization, to conserve our tribal property, to 
develop our community resources, to administer justice, and to pro
mote the welfare of ourselves and our descendants, do hereby ordain 
and establish this constitution and by-laws as a guide for the delib
erations of our tribal council in their administration of tribal affairs.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe of Indians 
shall extend to the territory within the confines of the Pyramid 
Lake Indian Reservation as established by Executive order of March 
23, 1874; to all lands claimed by the tribe to which title in the 
tribe may be established; and to such other lands as may hereafter be 
added thereto under any law of the United States, except as other
wise provided by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe 

shall consist of the following:

(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the offi

cial rolls of the Pyramid Lake Reservation as of January 1, 1935.

(b)  All children born to any member of the Pyramid Lake Paiute 
Tribe who is a resident of the reservation at the time of the birth 
of said children.

Sec. 2. The council shall have the power to propose ordinances, 
subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing fu
ture membership and the adoption of members by the tribe, provided 
that no existing property rights shall be affected by this section.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe 
shall consist of a council known as the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal 
Council.

Sec. 2. The tribal council shall be composed of ten councilmen 

elected by secret ballot.

Sec. 3. The tribal council so organized shall elect from its own 
members, a council chairman and vice chairman, and from within 
or without its own members, a secretary, a treasurer, and such other 
officers and committees as may be deemed necessary.

Sec. 4. Councilmen shall hold office for a term of two years or 

until their successors are elected.

Article IV—Nominations and Elections

Section 1. The first election of a tribal council under this con
stitution shall be called, held, and supervised by the present tribal 
council within 30 days after the ratification and approval of this 
constitution, and thereafter elections shall be held every two years 
on a date to be determined by the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal 
Council and announced at least 30 days in advance. The election 
date shall fall between December 26 and 30.

Sec. 2. Any qualified voter of the tribe may announce his can
didacy for the council by notifying the secretary of the tribal council, 
in writing, of his candidacy at least 15 days prior to the election. 
It shall be the duty of the secretary to post the names of all candi
dates who have met these requirements at least 10 days before the 
election.

Sec. 3. The Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council, or a board 
appointed by the council, shall determine rules and regulations gov
erning elections, and shall certify to the election of the members of 
the council within one day after the election returns.

Sec. 4. Any member of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe who is 
21 years of age or over and who has maintained a legal residence 
for at least one year on the Pyramid Lake Reservation shall be 
entitled to vote.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal from Office

Section 1. If a councilman or other official shall die, resign, per
manently leave the reservation, or be removed from office, the council 
shall declare the office vacant and appoint a successor to fill the 
unexpired term.

Sec. 2. Any councilman who is proven guilty of improper conduct, 
or gross neglect of duty may be expelled from the council by a 
two-thirds vote of the council members, provided that the accused 
member is given full opportunity to reply to any and all charges 
at a designated council meeting, and provided further that the 
accused member shall have been given a written statement of the 
charges against him at least five days before the meeting at which 
he is to be given an opportunity to reply.

Article VI—Powers and Duties of the Tribal Council

Section 1. The Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council shall exercise 
the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the 
Statutes or the Constitution of the United States, and subject further 
to all express restrictions upon such powers contained in this con
stitution and the attached by-laws:

(a)  To enter into negotiations with the Federal, State, and local 

governments on behalf of the tribe.

(b)  To present and prosecute any claims or demands of the 
Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe; to assist members of the tribe in presenting

their claims and grievances at any court or agency of the 
Government; and to employ representatives or counsel for such 
services, the choice of counsel and fixing of fees for counsel and 
representatives to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of 
the Interior.

(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encum
brance of tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets which 
may be authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, 
the Commissioner of Indian affairs, or any other official or agency 
of the Government, provided that no tribal lands shall ever be sold, 
encumbered or leased for a period exceeding five years.

(d)  To confer with the Secretary of the Interior upon all appro
priation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the tribe 
prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of the 
Budget and Congress.

(e)  To make assignments of tribal land to members of the 
Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe in conformity with article VII of this 
constitution.

(f)  To administer any funds or property within the control of 
the tribe, to make expenditures from available funds for public 
purposes, including salaries or other remuneration of tribal officials 
or employees, such salaries or remuneration to be paid only for 
services actually authorized in a regular and legal manner and 
actually rendered. All expenditures shall be by resolution duly 
approved by a majority vote of the council, and the amounts so 
expended shall be a matter of public record at all times.

(g)  To require individual members of the tribe, or other Indian 
residents upon the reservation to assist with community labor, when 
just cause or extreme emergency exists.

(h)  To create and maintain a Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal 
Council Fund by accepting grants or donations from any person, 
State, or the United States, or by levying assessments of not less than 
ten cents or more than one dollar per year per capita on the qualified 
voters of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe, and to require the per
formance of community labor in lieu thereof, or by levying taxes 
and license fees, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
upon non-members doing business within the reservation.

(i)  To provide by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, for removal or exclusion from the reservation of any 
non-members whose presence may be injurious to the members of the 
tribe.

(j)  To promulgate ordinances for the purpose of safeguarding 
the peace and safety of residents of the reservation, and to establish 
courts for the adjudication of claims or disputes and for the trial 
and penalizing of Indians within the reservation charged with the 
commission of offenses set forth in such ordinances.

(k)  To regulate the inheritance of property within the reserva

tion, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(1)  To provide by ordinance for the appointment of guardians 
for minors and mental incompetents, subject to the approval of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(m)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the council 
itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials of the reserva
tion.

Sec. 2. Any resolution or ordinance which, by terms of this con
stitution, is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, shall 
be presented to the Superintendent of the reservation, who shall, 
within ten days thereafter approve or disapprove the same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy bearing his endorsement, to the Secretary of the 
Interior who may, within ninety days from the date of enactment, 
rescind the ordinance or resolution by notifying the council of such 
action.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within ten days from its enactment, 
he shall advise the tribal council of his reasons therefor. If these 
reasons appear to the council insufficient it may, by a majority vote, 
refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may, within ninety days from the date of its enactment, approve 
the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution 
becomes effective.

Sec. 3. Future powers.—The council of the Pyramid Lake Paiute 
Tribe may exercise, subject to popular referendum, such further 
powers as may in the future be delegated to the tribe by the Secre
tary of the Interior, or by any other duly authorized official or 
agency of Government.

Sec. 4. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore 
vested in the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe but not expressly referred 
to in this constitution, shall not be abridged by this article, but may 
be exercised by the people of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe through 
the adoption of appropriate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Article VII—Tribal Lands

Sec. 1. The lands of the Pyramid Lake Reservation and all lands 
which may hereafter be acquired by the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe 
or by the United States in trust for the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe, 
shall be held as tribal lands, and no part of such land shall be mort
gaged or sold. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to individual 
Indians but may be assigned to members of the Pyramid Lake Paiute 
Tribe, or leased, or otherwise used by the tribe, as hereinafter 
provided.

Sec. 2. Tribal lands may be leased by the tribal council, with 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, for such periods of 
time as are permitted by law.

In the leasing of tribal lands preference shall be given, first to 
Indian cooperative associations, and secondly to individual Indians 
who are members of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe. No lease of 
tribal land to a non-member shall be made by the tribal council 
unless it shall appear that no Indian cooperative association or in
dividual member of the tribe is able and willing to use the land and 
to pay a reasonable fee for such use.

Grazing permits covering tribal land may be issued by the Pyra
mid Lake Paiute Tribal Council, with the approval of the Secretary 
of the Interior, in the same manner and upon the same terms as 
leases.

Sec. 3. In any assignment of tribal lands which are now owned by 
the tribe or which hereafter may be acquired for the tribe by the 
United States or purchased by the tribe out of tribal funds, pref
erence shall be given first, to heads of families which are entirely 
landless and second, to heads of families which have already received 
assignments consisting of less than an economic unit of land, as may 
be determined from time to time by the tribal council.

The tribal council may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of not to exceed 

$5.00 on approval of an assignment made under this section.

Sec. 4. If any member of the tribe holding an assignment of land 
shall, for a period of two (2) years, fail to use the land so assigned, 
such assignment may be canceled by the tribal council after due 
notice and an opportunity to be heard, and the said land may be re
assigned in accordance with the provisions of section 3 of this article.
Upon the death of any Indian holding an assignment, his heirs, 
or other individuals designated by him, by will or by written request, 
shall have a preference in the reassignment of the land, provided 
such persons are members of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe who 
would be eligible to receive an assignment.

Sec. 5. Applications for assignments shall be filed with the secre
tary of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council and shall be in 
writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons applying 
for the land and as accurate a description of the land desired as the 
circumstances will permit. Notices of all applications received by 
the secretary shall be posted by him in the agency office and in at 
least three conspicuous places in the district in which the land is 
located, for not less than twenty days before action is taken by the 
council. Any member of the tribe wishing to oppose the granting 
of an assignment shall do so in writing, setting forth his objections, 
to be filed with the secretary of the council, and may if he so desires, 
appear before the council to present evidence. The secretary of the 
council shall furnish the superintendent or other officers in charge 
of the agency a complete record of all action taken by the council 
on applications for assignment of land, and a complete record of 
assignments shall be kept in the agency office and shall be open for 
inspection by members of the tribe.

The council shall draw up one or more forms for assignments, 
which shall be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior.

Article VIII—Referendum

Upon a petition of at least one-third of the qualified voters of 
the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe a referendum may be demanded on 
any enacted or proposed ordinance or resolution of the tribal coun
cil, and the vote of the majority of the qualified voters in such refer
endum shall be conclusive and binding on the tribal council.

Article IX—Amendments

This constitution and by-laws may be amended by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the tribe voting at an election called for 
that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at least 
30 percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; but 

no amendment shall become effective until it shall have been approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior. It shall be the duty of the Secretary 
of the Interior to call an election on any proposed amendment, at 
the request of the council, or upon presentation of a petition signed 
by one-third (1/3) of the qualified voters, members of the tribe.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE PYRAMID LAKE PAIUTE TRIBE OF NEVADA

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the chairman to preside at all 

meetings of the council.

Sec. 2. In the absence of the regular chairman the vice-chairman 
shall preside and he shall have all powers, privileges, and duties 
of the regular chairman.

Sec. 3. It shall be the duty of the tribal secretary to keep a true and 
accurate record of all matters affecting the tribal records, to render 
a proper accounting of such records at all meetings of the council, 
and to keep an accurate record of all council proceedings, including 
the minutes of each special and regular meeting. Minutes of all 
special or regular meetings shall be in triplicate, the original copy 
to be presented to the superintendent, and one copy to be transmitted 
to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 4. The duties of the treasurer of the Pyramid Lake Paiute 

Tribal Council shall be as follows:

(a)  He shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard 
all funds in the custody of the council, whether same be tribal 
funds or special funds for which the council is acting as trustee or 
custodian.

(b)  He shall deposit all such funds in such bank or elsewhere, as 
directed by the council, and he shall keep an accurate record, filing 
same in the office of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council, and he 
shall report in writing all receipts and expenditures and accounts and 
the nature of all funds in his possession, or custody, once every six 
months to the tribal council, or at any time he is requested to do so 
by the tribal council.

(c)  He shall not disburse any funds in his custody belonging to the 
Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council except when authorized by a 
motion duly passed and properly recorded by the council.

(d)  The treasurer of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council shall 
be requested to furnish a bond satisfactory to the council and to the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs. Except that until he is bonded, the 
council may make such provision for the custody and disbursements 
of funds as shall guarantee their safety and proper disbursement 
and use.

(e)  The books and records of the treasurer shall be audited at 
least once each year by a competent auditor employed by the tribal 
council or under the direction of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Article II.  —Qualifications for Office

Any person, to be elected as an officer or councilman, must be a 
Pyramid Lake Paiute Indian, enrolled on the Pyramid Lake Reservation, 

residing thereon, and over twenty-five (25) years of age at 
the time of his or her election. The tribal council shall be the sole 
judge of the qualifications of its own members.

Article III.  —Conduct of Elections and Certification

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the council to see that each nomi
nation for tribal office, including membership in the council, shall be 
made in strict accord with the provisions of the constitution. The 
council shall certify as to the legality of such nomination; otherwise, 
it shall be considered illegal and ineffective by the council.

Sec. 2. All tribal elections for officers shall be canvassed and certi
fied by the council or by a board appointed by it within one day 
after such elections. No candidate shall be considered legally elect
ed, nor shall he hold office until such canvass and certification shall 
have been made by the council.

Sec. 3. All necessary details concerning tribal nominations and 
elections not specifically covered by these by-laws or in the constitu
tion shall be more fully set forth in ordinances to be hereafter 
established by the council.

Article IV.  —Meetings and Procedures

Section 1. Immediately after the election of members of the tribal 
council and when the elected members are duly certified as provided 
for in Article IV of this constitution, the members shall assemble 
and organize for business.

Sec. 2. The council shall meet regularly on the first Saturday of 

each month.

Sec. 3. Special meetings of the council shall be held at such times 
as are designated by the chairman, who shall notify members at 
least twenty-four hours before the date of such meetings.

Sec. 4. At any special or regular meeting of the tribal council 
three-fifths of the council members shall constitute a quorum and 
without such a quorum the chairman shall adjourn the meeting.

Sec. 5. Special meetings of the council shall be held upon call 
of the chairman or by written request of three members of the 
council or by petition signed by one-third of the legal voters of the 
tribe, such written request to be filed with the chairman or secretary 
of the council, who shall notify the council members twenty-four 
hours before the date of such council meeting.

Sec. 6. The order of business at any regular or special meeting of 

the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council shall be as follows:

(a)  Council called to order.
(b)  Roll call.
(c)  Reading of minutes of previous meeting.
(d)  Reports of standing committees.
(e)  Reports of council treasurer.
(f)  Reports of special committees.
(g)  Reading of communications and reports.
(h)  Unfinished business.
(i)  New business.
(j)  Adjournment.

Sec. 7. It shall be the duty of the council to exercise care and 
caution to the end that a complete record is preserved of all acts 
of the council and of all committees appointed therefrom. Accurate 
copies of all records shall be preserved in the files of the council 
and accurate copies of all necessary records shall be transmitted 
to such Bureaus, Departments, or elsewhere as may be required.

Sec. 8. All records of the council and its committees or delegates 
shall at all times be a matter of public record; and any member 
of the Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribe or his authorized representative, 
or any properly authorized officer or employee of any Government 
department, shall have full access to same during business hours. 
However, it is provided that matters before the council while in 
executive session shall be, at the option of the council, withheld from 
the public or from individuals or their representatives, until after 
same shall have been acted upon or otherwise quietly disposed of.

Sec. 9. Copies of all leases, contracts, deeds, or assignments, and 
all other papers and documents pertaining to lands of any nature on 
the reservation, shall be carefully preserved by the council and inso
far as it is possible all other documents affecting the rights and 
equities of the tribe as a whole, or the individual members thereof, 
shall be kept and preserved in order that such information shall at 
all times be available to the council and to the individual members 
of the tribe. Duplicates of all such documents shall be deposited 
in the files of the agencv.

Article V—Tribal Court (Judicial Code)

Section 1. (a) It shall be the duty of the council to provide, 
through the necessary by-laws or ordinances, for the establishment 
of a tribal court upon the reservation.

(b)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all such offenses as 
may be provided in the ordinances of the council, unless they fall 
within the exclusive jurisdiction of Federal or State courts.

(c)  This court shall have jurisdiction over all Indians upon the 
reservation and over such disputes or lawsuits as shall occur be
tween Indians on the reservation or between Indians and non-Indi
ans where such cases are brought before it by stipulation of both 
parties.

(d)  The duties and jurisdiction of this court shall be more fully 

prescribed by appropriate by-laws or ordinances.

Sec. 2. It shall be the duty of the council to establish by ordinance 
a tribal police force which shall have full jurisdiction upon the 
reservation, in all cases not falling within the exclusive jurisdiction 
of Federal or State courts. The authorities and duties under which 
it will function may be outlined by the council, and such police 
shall be employees of the council, and the police force shall be an 
agency of the tribal court.

Article VI—Property Regulations

Section 1. It shall be the duty of the council to pass rules and 
regulations to prevent unauthorized prospecting or mining of any 
kind upon the reservation and to see that such rules and regulations 
are properly enforced.

Sec. 2. The council shall pass ordinances for the control of 
hunting and fishing upon the reservation, such ordinances not to 
be in conflict with any of the Federal game laws. The council 
shall enforce ordinances and cooperate with Federal authorities 
in the protection of game on the reservation. The council may issue 
licenses for hunting and fishing and prohibit hunting and fishing 
without such licenses.

Article VII—Public Welfare

Section 1. Community welfare.— (a) The council shall determine 
in careful manner what constitutes just cause for aid or assistance 
to the indigent members of the tribe, and shall make proper pro
visions for recommendation to proper agencies of individuals need
ing relief.

(b)  The council shall designate persons who shall administer wel
fare work on the reservation, and the solicitation and expenditure 
of welfare funds shall be conducted in a systematic manner so that 
the right to do so may not be abused. The council shall thereby 
render assistance or aid to the aged, the physically handicapped, and 
all others in actual need of assistance.

(c)  The council shall at all times endeavor to eliminate the causes 
for indigency, exercising wise and judicious supervision and man
agement of tribal affairs and finances and, insofar as is possible, 
of the affairs and finances of individual members of the tribe, to 
the end that need, privation, and financial distress may be entirely 
eliminated among the members of the tribe.

Sec. 2. Education.—(a) The council shall pass necessary ordinances 
to promote and increase learning and education among the members 
of the tribe, studying present school systems, and recommending 
plans for improving them to the proper bureaus or departments.

(b)  The council shall enter into negotiations with non-reservation 
schools and procure for the members of the tribe the highest type of 
educational facilities, to the end that younger members of the tribe 
shall have every possible economic, social, and cultural advantage.
(c)  The council shall encourage and promote among the residents 
of the reservation by every practical means a proper system of 
education for members of all ages in such subjects as home economics, 
hygiene, child care and training, agronomy, farm mechanics, etc., co
operating with State and Federal departments, and agencies which 
seek to promote such work.

Article VIII—Loans

The tribal council shall act upon all applications for loans under 
the revolving fund or reimbursable regulations for the purchase 
of property, stock, or equipment. Loans to Indians for the payment 
of tuition for higher education or trade schools may be recommended 
by the tribal council to the appropriate committee.

Article IX—Application for Funds

The Pyramid Lake Paiute Tribal Council shall act in an advisory 
capacity upon all applications to the Superintendent for the withdrawal

from the United States Treasury of trust funds or any other 
tribal funds and may adopt rules and regulations not in conflict 
with law, subject to the approval of the Superintendent, governing 
withdrawal of individual Indian moneys.

Article X—Tribal Claims

The tribal council shall make a thorough survey, research, investi
gation, and study of the history and title of all lands which were 
tribal in character in times past, and shall endeavor to reestablish 
the tribal equity, if any, in such lands so as to obtain through proper 
channels just compensation for such lands as it shall find to have 
been unlawfully removed from the jurisdiction of the tribe without 
just compensation.

Article XI—Guardianship

The tribal council shall pass all necessary ordinances whereby the 
rights of miners and incompetents shall be properly safeguarded 
and shall see that the administration of their funds and other assets, 
by guardians responsible to the council, shall be for the exclusive 
benefit of such miners or incompetents. It shall be the duty of the 
council to make semi-annual reports concerning all such guardian
ship funds or assets, and such reports shall be matters of public 
record.

Article XII

This constitution and by-laws when ratified by a majority vote 
 of the qualified voters of the Pyramid Lake Reservation voting at 
an election called for the purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, 
provided that at least thirty (30) per cent of those entitled to vote 
shall vote in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary of 
the Interior, and, if approved, shall be effective from the date of 
approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 20, 1935. by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached constitution and by-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the Indians of the Pyramid Lake Paiute 
Tribe of the Pyramid Lake Reservation and was on December 14, 
1935, duly approved by a vote of 69 for, and 34 against, in an 
election in which over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their 
ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the act of June 
15, 1935 (Public, No. 147, 74th Cong.).

Dewey E. Sampson,

Chairman of Election Board.

Wm. O’Day,

Secretary of the Election Board.

Alida C. Bowler, 

Superintendent in Charge of the Reservation.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached constitution and by-laws of the Pyramid Lake Paiute 
Tribe of Indians on the Pyramid Lake Reservation.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
by-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended January 7, 1936.

William Zimmerman, Jr., 

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

Washington, D. C., January 15, 1936.

