 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS
OF THE

QUARTZ VALLEY INDIAN COMMUNITY 
CALIFORNIA


 
  
  
 APPROVED JUNE 15, 1939 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1939 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE QUARTZ VALLEY 
INDIAN COMMUNITY, CALIFORNIA

PREAMBLE


We, the adult Indians residing on the Indian Reservation in 
Quartz Valley, California, proclaimed by the Secretary of the Interior 
“for such Shasta and Upper Klamath Indians eligible to participate 
in the benefits of the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as shall be 
designated by the Secretary of the Interior," in order to establish a 
community organization, to conserve and develop our lands and 
resources and to promote the welfare of ourselves and our descend
ants, do hereby ordain and establish this Constitution and By-laws 
for the Quartz Valley Indian Community.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Quartz Valley Indian Community shall 
embrace land purchased by the United States in Quartz Valley, Cali
fornia, heretofore proclaimed an Indian Reservation for the occu
pancy and use of such Shasta and Upper Klamath Indians as are 
eligible to participate in the benefits of the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984) and any additional land bought by the Federal Govern
ment for the use of the Community, or any land bought by the 
Community itself.

The aforesaid reservation shall hereafter be known as the Quartz 

Valley Indian Reservation.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Quartz Valley Indian Com

munity shall consist of:

(a) All persons of one-half degree or more Indian blood who are 
given assignments of land on the Quartz Valley Indian Reservation, 
together with their children of one-half degree or more Indian blood 
residing with them.

(b) All children born hereafter to any member of the Community.
Sec. 2. The General Community Council shall have the power to 
promulgate ordinances, subject to the review of the Secretary of the 
Interior, covering future membership, loss of membership, and the 
adoption of new members when the council shall find that there is 
sufficient available land, except that no person of less than degree 
Indian blood may be accepted by means of adoption.

(a) The General Community Council shall have the power, subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, to adopt into its 
membership those persons whose names were not found on the Roll of

California Indians, but who are persons of one-half degree or more 
Indian blood, and recognized by the General Community Council as 
entitled to membership in their group.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Quartz Valley Indian Com
munity shall be the General Community Council which shall be 
composed of all qualified members of the Community.

Sec. 2. Any enrolled member of the Community who is twenty-one 

years of age or over shall be entitled to vote.

Sec. 3. The General Community Council shall elect from its mem
bers by secret ballot, a Chairman; a Vice-Chairman; and a Secretary
Treasurer: and such other officers and committees as may be deemed 
necessary.

Sec. 4. The General Community Council shall meet during each 

alternate month on a day selected by the Community Council.

Sec. 5. Within thirty days after the ratification and approval of 
this Constitution and By-laws, a General Community Council meet
ing shall be called and supervised by the present Business Committee 
in cooperation with the Superintendent of the Hoopa Valley Agency 
for the purpose of electing the officers named herein for the General 
Community Council and to transact such other business as may be 
necessary. Officers elected at this meeting shall serve until June 
30, 1939.

Sec. 6. Immediately after organization of the General Community 
Council as provided for in Section 5, the Business Committee shall 
cease to exist, and all the powers and duties thereof shall be assumed 
henceforth by the General Community Council.

Sec. 7. After the first election of the General Community Council 

the annual election shall be held at the June meeting.

Sec. 8. The Chairman of the Community Council, or a majority of 
the qualified voters may, by written notice posted at least ten days in 
advance of the meeting, call a special meeting of the General Com
munity Council.

Sec. 9. One-third of the resident qualified voters of the Community 
shall constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting of the 
General Community Council.

Article IV—Referendum

Upon a petition of at least a majority of the resident qualified 
voters of the Quartz Valley Indian Community, any enacted or pro
posed ordinance, resolution or other regulative act of the General 
Community Council shall be submitted to a referendum of the resi
dent qualified voters.

Article V—Powers of the General Community Council

Section 1. The General Community Council of the Quartz Valley 
Indian Community shall have the following powers, subject to any 
limitations imposed by the statutes or the Constitution of the United 
States.

(a)  To negotiate with Federal, State and local Governments;

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and fixing of 

fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior;

(c)  To veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance of com
munity lands, interests in lands, or other assets of the Community;
(d)  To confer with the Secretary of the Interior with regard to 
all appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Quartz Valley Indian Community, prior to the submission of such 
estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Quartz 
Valley Indian Community in accordance with the terms of a charter 
that may be issued to the Community by the Secretary of the Interior.
(f) To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, providing for the regula
tion of hunting and fishing upon Community lands; for the licensing 
of non-members coming upon Community lands for the purposes of 
hunting, fishing, trading, or other business; for the exclusion from 
Community lands of persons not legally entitled to reside therein; 
for the maintenance of law and order within the Community and for 
cooperation with proper agencies for law enforcement.

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and delegate to such organizations, or to subordinate boards or officials 
of the Community, any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right 
to review any action taken by virtue of such delegated power.

(h)  To adopt resolutions not inconsistent with this Constitution 
and By-laws, regulating the procedure of the Council itself and of 
other Community agencies, officials, or organizations of the Quartz 
Valley Indian Community.

(i) To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, providing for the manner 
of making, holding and revoking assignments of tribal land or 
interests therein.

Sec. 2. The General Community Council may exercise such further 
powers as may in the future be delegated to it by the Secretary of the 
Interior or by any other authorized official or agency of the State or 
Federal Government; and may exercise such rights and powers as 
may be delegated to it by the individual members of the Community.
Sec. 3. Manner of Review.—Any ordinance or resolution which by 
the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Hoopa 
Valley Indian Agency who shall, within ten days thereafter, approve 
or disapprove the same. If the Superintendent approves any ordi
nance or resolution it shall thereupon become effective, but the Super
intendent shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, 
to the Secretary of the Interior who may, within 90 days from the 
date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any 
cause by notifying the Community Council of his action. If the 
Superintendent refuses to approve any ordinance or resolution sub
mitted to him within 10 days after its enactment he shall advise the 
Community of his reasons. The Community Council may by a 
majority vote refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of 
the Interior who may, within 90 days from the date of its enactment, 
approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or 
resolution shall become effective.

Article VI—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution and By-laws may be proposed by 
a majority vote of the Quartz Valley Community Council and may 
be ratified and approved in the same manner as this Constitution 
and By-laws.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE QUARTZ VALLEY INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman shall preside over all meetings of the 
Council, shall perform the usual duties of a Chairman, and exercise 
any authority delegated to him by the Council. He shall vote only 
in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman shall assist the Chairman when called 
upon to do so and in the absence of the Chairman he shall preside. 
When so presiding he shall have all the rights, privileges and duties 
as well as the responsibilities of the Chairman.

Sec. 3. The Secretary-Treasurer of the Council shall conduct all 
the Community correspondence and shall keep an accurate record of 
all matters transacted at Council meetings. It shall be his duty to 
submit promptly to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction and the 
Commissioner of Indian Affairs, copies of all minutes of regular and 
special meetings of the Council.

He shall accept, receive, receipt for, preserve and safeguard all 
Community funds or special funds for which the Council is acting as 
trustee or custodian. He shall deposit all funds in such depository 
as the Council shall direct and shall make and preserve a faithful 
record of such funds, and shall report on all receipts and expendi
tures and the amount and nature of all funds in his possession and 
custody at each regular meeting of the General Community Council. 
An audit of accounts shall be made once a year and at such times as 
the Community Council or Commissioner may require.

He shall not pay out or otherwise disburse any funds in his posses
sion or custody, except in accordance with a resolution duly passed 
by the Council.

He shall be required to give a bond satisfactory to the Council and 
to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, when sufficient funds have 
accumulated in the Community treasury in the opinion of the Com
munity Council or of the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 4. The duties of all appointive boards or officers of the Com
munity shall be clearly defined by resolutions of the Council at the 
time of their creation or appointment. Such boards and officers shall 
report to the Council from time to time as required, and their activi
ties and decisions shall be subject to review by the Council upon the 
petition of any person aggrieved.

Article II—Adoption

This Constitution and By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote 
of the adult Indians residing on the Quartz Valley Indian Reserva
tion, as set forth in Article I of this Constitution, voting at a special 
election called by the Secretary of the Interior in which at least 30 

per cent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior for his approval, and shall be effective from 
the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved March 29. 1939 by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the adult Shasta and Upper Klamath 
Indians residing on the Indian Reservation in Quartz Valley, Cali
fornia, and was on May 9, 1939, duly ratified by a vote of 7 for and 0 
against, in an election in which over 30 per cent of those entitled to 
vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16' of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 
the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Harry Burcell, 

Chairman of Election Board.
Jetty Tom, 
Secretary of Election Board.

O. M. Boggess,

Superintendent, Hoopa Valley Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Quartz Valley 
Indian Community of California.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution and 
By-laws, are hereby declared inapplicable to the Quartz Valley Indian 
Community.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended.
F. H. Daiker,

Assistant to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Oscar L. Chapman, 

Assistant Secretary of the Interior. 

[seal]

Washington, D. C., June 15, 1939.

