 
 UNITED STATES 
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 

THE QUILEUTE TRIBE OF THE 

QUILEUTE RESERVATION

WASHINGTON


 
  
 APPROVED NOVEMBER 11, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1937

Constitution and by-laws of the quileute
 
 
TRIBE OF THE QUILEUTE RESERVATION

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the Indians of the Quileute Tribe of the Quileute Reservation, 
Washington, pursuant to the Act of Congress of June 18, 1934, do 
hereby establish this Constitution of the Quileute Tribe, in order to 
secure a more perfect tribal organization, promote the general wel
fare, encourage educational progress, conserve and develop our lands 
and resources, and secure to ourselves and our posterity the power to 
exercise certain rights of home rule.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Quileute Tribe shall include all the terri
tory within the original confines of the Quileute Reservation as set 
forth by Executive Order of February 19, 1889, and shall extend to 
such other lands as have been or may hereafter be added thereto un
der any law of the United States, except as otherwise provided 
by law.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Quileute Tribe shall consist of:
(a)  All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 

census roll of the Tribe as of April 1, 1935;

(b)  All children born to any member of the Tribe provided such 
member is a resident of the reservation at the time of the birth of 
such children, all children of one-half (1/2) or more Indian blood born 
to any non-resident member of the Tribe, and all children of any 
degree of Indian blood both of whose parents are members of the 
Tribe.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall have the power to promulgate 
ordinances subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, govern
ing future membership and the adoption of new members, making 
any necessary adjustments of property rights.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Quileute Tribe shall consist 

of a council known as the Quileute Tribal Council.

Sec. 2. This Council shall consist of five (5) members each of whom 
shall serve three years and until his successor is elected and installed. 
Two (2) members shall be elected each year on the last Monday in 
December except 1937 and every third year thereafter when one (1) 
shall be elected. 

Sec. 3. The Council so organized shall elect from within its own 
number (1) a Chairman; (2) a Vice-Chairman; and from within or

...

without, (3) a Secretary, and (4) a Treasurer, and may appoint or 
employ such other officers or committees as may be deemed necessary.
Sec. 4. Within thirty (30) days after the ratification of this Con
stitution and its approval by the Secretary of the Interior, the present 
Tribal Council shall call a general tribal meeting for the election of 
officers in accordance with this Constitution. The two (2) candidates 
receiving the highest number of votes shall hold office until their suc
cessors are elected and installed in 1939; the two candidates receiving 
the next highest number of votes shall hold office until their succes
sors are elected and installed in 1938; and the next highest, until his 
successor is elected in 1937.

Article IV—Elections for the Tribal Council

Section 1. Any member of the Quileute Indian Tribe twenty-one 
(21) years of age or over who has maintained legal residence within 
the Quileute Reservation or within the territory of Clallam County 
for one year immediately preceding any election, shall be entitled 
to vote or be elected to office therein.

Sec. 2. All elections shall be by secret ballot and shall be held in 
accordance with the rules and regulations prescribed by the Tribal 
Council or by an election board appointed by the Tribal Council.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal From Office

Section 1. If a Council member shall die, resign, or permanently 
leave the reservation, be recalled or removed from office for cause, 
the Council shall declare the position vacant and appoint a successor 
to serve until the annual general tribal meeting is held in December, 
at which time the general tribal meeting shall elect a successor for 
the unexpired term.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council may, by a four-fifths (4/5) vote of its 
total membership, expel any member for neglect of duty or gross 
misconduct, provided charges are made in writing, subscribed by 
competent witnesses and formally served upon the accused at least 
five (5) days prior to a public hearing. The accused member shall 
be given a full and fair opportunity to reply to any and all such 
charges against him, and also the opportunity to summon witnesses 
in his behalf.

Sec. 3. Upon a petition of at least one-third (1/3) of the eligible 
voters of the Quileute Tribe it shall be the duty of the Tribal Council 
to call a special election to consider the recall of the member or 
members of the Council named in such petition. If a majority of 
those voting in such election shall vote in favor of such recall from 
office, the office shall be declared vacant, and the Tribal Council 
shall proceed in the usual manner to hold an election to fill the said 
office.

Article VI—Powers of the Tribal Council

Section 1. The Quileute Tribal Council shall exercise the follow
ing powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the Federal Stat
utes, the Constitution of the United States, and subject further to 
all express restrictions upon such powers provided in this Constitution 
and By-Laws:

(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments 
on behalf of the Quileute Tribe, and to advise and consult with the 
representatives of the Interior Department on all activities of the 
Department that may effect the Quileute Tribe and its members.

(b)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the rights of the Quileute Tribe, and its members, the choice of 
such counsel and the fixing of fees to be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets which may be 
authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, or any other official or agency of govern
ment, provided that no tribal lands shall ever be sold or encumbered, 
or leased for a period exceeding ten (10) years except for govern
mental purposes.

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior or his representa
tives on all appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit 
of the Quileute Tribe, prior to the submission of such estimates to 
the Bureau of the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Quileute 
Tribe in accordance with the terms of a charter that may be issued 
to the Quileute Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior.

(f) To levy and collect assessments upon members of the Quileute 
Tribe, or to require the performance of community labor in lieu 
thereof, provided that no taxes may be levied, nor community labor 
required, except when approved at the annual December general 
tribal meeting, or at a special general tribal meeting called for that 
purpose.

(g) To levy and collect taxes or license fees upon non-members 
doing business on the reservation, to exclude from the territory of 
the Tribe persons not legally entitled to reside thereon, or trespassers 
upon the reservation, under ordinances, all of which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(h)  To enact resolutions or ordinances not inconsistent with Ar
ticle II of this Constitution governing adoption and abandonment 
of membership, and to keep at all times a correct roll of the mem
bers of the Quileute Indian Tribe.

(i)  To promulgate and enforce ordinances, which shall be subject 
to review by the Secretary of the Interior, governing the conduct 
of members of the Quileute Tribe, and providing for the mainte
nance of law and order, and the administration of justice by estab
lishing a Tribal Court, and defining its duties, powers and limita
tions.

(j)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals and gen
eral welfare of the Quileute Tribe by regulating the conduct of trade, 
and the use and disposition of property upon the reservation, pro
vided that any ordinances directly affecting non-members of the 
Tribe shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(k)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes, 
and to regulate the activities of cooperative associations of members 
of the Quileute Indian Tribe by ordinances, provided that any such 
ordinances shall be subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior.

(l)  To appropriate for public purposes of the reservation any 
available tribal funds, provided that any such appropriation made 
prior to July 1, 1940, shall be subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior.

(m)  To provide for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents, by ordinance or resolution subject to review by 
the Secretary of the Interior.

(n)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Council 
itself, and other tribal agencies and tribal officials of the reservation.
(o)  To acquire, under condemnation proceedings in courts of com
petent jurisdiction, land or other property needed for public purposes, 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(p) To make assignments of tribal land to members of the Tribe 

in conformity with Article VIII of this Constitution.

(q)  To regulate the domestic relations of members of the Tribe.
(r)  To delegate to subordinate boards, or to cooperative associa
tions, which are open to all members of the Tribe, any of the 
foregoing powers, reserving the right to review any action taken by 
such body to whom such power has been delegated.

Sec. 2. Manner of review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the 
reservation who shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or 
disapprove the same. If the Superintendent shall approve said ordi
nance or resolution, it shall thereupon become effective, but the 
Superintendent shall transmit a copy of the same bearing his endorse
ment to the Secretary of the Interior, who may within ninety (90) 
days from the date of enactment rescind the said ordinance or 
resolution for any cause by notifying the Tribal Council of such 
decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him within ten (10) days after its enactment, 
he shall advise the Quileute Tribal Council of his reasons therefor. 
If these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may by a ma
jority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may within ninety (90) days from the date of its enact
ment approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance 
or resolution shall become effective.

Sec. 3. Further powers.—The Quileute Tribal Council may exer
cise such further powers as may in the future be delegated to the 
Council by the Secretary of the Interior, or by any other duly 
authorized official or agency of government.

Sec. 4. Reserved powers.—Any rights or powers heretofore vested 
in the Quileute Tribe but not expressly referred to in this Constitu
tion, shall not be abridged by this Article, but may be exercised by 
the people of the Quileute Tribe through the adoption of appro
priate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

Article VII—Bile of Rights

Section 1. Suffrage.—All members of the Tribe over the age of 
twenty-one (21) shall have the right to vote in all tribal reservation 
elections. The residence qualifications established by Article IV of 

this Constitution shall apply to all elections except elections for the 
amendment of this Constitution and By-laws.

Sec. 2. Economic rights.—All members of the Tribe shall be ac
corded equal opportunities to participate in the economic resources 
and activities of the reservation.

Sec. 3. Civil liberties.—All members of the Tribe may enjoy, with
out hindrance, freedom of worship, conscience, speech, press, as
sembly, and association.

Sec. 4. Rights of accused.—Any member of the Quileute Tribe 
accused of any offense shall have the right to a prompt, open and 
public hearing, with due notice of the offense charged, and shall be 
permitted to summon witnesses on his own behalf. Trial by jury may 
be demanded by any prisoner accused of any offense punishable by 
more than thirty (30) days imprisonment or more than forty-five 
($45.00) dollars fine.

Excessive bail shall not be required and cruel punishment shall not 

be imposed.

Article VIII—Land

Section 1. Allotted lands.—Allotted lands, including heirship lands, 
within the Quileute Reservation shall continue to be held as hereto
fore by their present owners. It is recognized that under existing 
law such lands may be condemned for public purposes, such as 
roads, public buildings, or other public improvements, upon payment 
of adequate compensation, by any agency of the State of Washing
ton or of the Federal Government, or by the Tribe itself. It is fur
ther recognized that under existing law such lands may be inherited 
by the heirs of the present owner, whether or not they are members 
of the Quileute Tribe. Likewise, it is recognized that under existing 
law, the Secretary of the Interior may, in his discretion, remove 
restrictions upon such land, upon application by the Indian owner, 
whereupon the land will become subject to State taxes and may then 
be mortgaged or sold. The right of the individual Indian to hold 
or to part with his land, as under existing law, shall not be abro
gated by anything contained in this Constitution, but the owner of 
restricted land may, with the approval of the Secretary of the 
Interior, voluntarily convey his land to the Quileute Tribe either in 
exchange for a money payment or in exchange for an assignment 
covering the same land, or other land, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 2. Tribal lands.—The unallotted lands of the Quileute Reser
vation, and all lands which may hereafter be acquired by the Quileute 
Tribe or by the United States in trust for the Quileute Tribe, shall be 
held as tribal lands, and no part of such land shall be mortgaged or 
sold. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to individual Indians but 
may be assigned to members of the Quileute Tribe, or leased, or other
wise used by the Tribe, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 3. Leasing of tribed lands.—Tribal lands may be leased by the 
Tribal Council, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 
for such periods of time as are permitted by law.

In the leasing of tribal lands, preference shall be given, first, to 
cooperative associations of members of the Tribe, and second, to 
members of the Quileute Tribe.

Sec. 4. Grant of standard assignments.—In any assignment of 
tribal lands which now are owned by the Tribe or which hereafter 
may be acquired for the Tribe by the United States or purchased by 
the Tribe out of tribal funds, preference shall be given, first, to heads 
of families which are entirely landless, and second, to heads 
of families whose assignments consist of less than an economic unit.
No allotted member of the Quileute Tribe who may hereafter have 
the restrictions upon his land removed and whose land may there
after be alienated, except to the Tribe, shall be entitled to receive an 
assignment of land as a landless member.

The Tribal Council may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of not to exceed 
five ($5.00) dollars on approval of an assignment made under this 
section.

Assignments made under this section shall be for the primary pur
pose of establishing homes for landless members and shall be Known 
as standard assignments.

Sec. 5. Tenure of standard assignments.—If any member of the 
Tribe holding a standard assignment of land shall, for a period of 
two (2) years, fail to use the land so assigned or use such land for any 
unlawful purpose, his assignment may be cancelled by the Tribal 
Council after due notice and an opportunity to be heard, and the said 
land may be reassigned in accordance with the provisions of section 
4 of this article.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a standard assignment, his 
heirs or other individuals designated by him, by will or by written 
request, shall have a preference in the reassignment of the land, pro
vided such persons are members of the Quileute Tribe who would be 
eligible to receive a standard assignment.

Sec. 6. Grant of exchange assignments.—Any member of the Tribe 
who owns an allotment or any share of heirship land may voluntarily 
transfer his interests in such land to the Tribe in exchange for an 
assignment to the same land or other land of equal value. If the 
assignee prefers, he may receive, in lieu of a specific tract of land, a 
proportionate share in a larger unit.

Assignments made under this section shall be known as exchange 

assignments.

Sec. 7. Leasing of exchange assignments.—Exchange assignments 
may be used by the assignee or leased by him to Indian cooperative 
associations of members of the Tribe or to individual members of 
the Tribe, or, if no individual member or cooperative association of 
members of the Tribe is able and willing to rent the land at a reason
able fee, such assignments may be leased to non-Indians in the same 
manner as allotted lands.

Sec. 8. Inheritance of exchange assignments.—Upon the death of 
the holder of any exchange assignment, such land shall be reassigned 
by the Tribal Council to his heirs or devisees, subject to the follow
ing conditions:

(a)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
is not a member of the Quileute Tribe, except that a life assignment 
may be made to the surviving widower or widow of the holder of 
an assignment.

(b)  Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who al
ready holds more than an economic unit of land, to be determined 
from time to time by the Tribal Council.

(c)  Such lands may not be subdivided among heirs or devisees 
into units too small for convenient management. No area of un
cleared or timber land shall be subdivided into units smaller than 
forty (40) acres, and no area of tillable agricultural land shall be 
subdivided into units smaller than two and one-half (2^) acres, 
except that land used for buildings or other improvements may be 
divided to suit the convenience of the parties. Where it is impos
sible to divide the land properly among the eligible heirs or devisees, 
the Tribal Council may issue to the eligible heirs or devisees other in
terests in tribal lands of the same value as the assignment of the 
decedent.

(d)  If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment in accordance with the pro
visions of section 4 of this article.

Sec. 9. Inheritance of improvements.—Improvements of any char
acter made upon assigned land may be bequeathed to and inherited 
by members of the Quileute Tribe or otherwise disposed of under 
such regulations as the Tribal Council shall provide; provided, that 
sales of improvements on the land of any decedent can be made only 
to members of the Quileute Indian Tribe.

Sec. 10. Exchange of assignments.—Assignments may be ex
changed between members of the Quileute Tribe by common consent 
in such manner as the Tribal Council shall designate.

Sec. 11. Use of unassigned tribal land.—Tribal land which is not 
assigned, including tribal timber reserves, shall be managed by the 
Tribal Council for the benefit of the members of the entire Tribe, 
and any cash income derived from such land shall accrue to the 
benefit of the Tribe as a whole. All action of the Tribal Council 
with respect to such lands shall be in conformity with departmental 
regulations for the protection of Indian range and timber resources 
authorized by section 6 of the Act of June 18, 1934.

Sec. 12. Purchase of land by tribe.—Tribal funds may be used, 
with the consent of the Secretary of the Interior, to acquire land, 
under the following conditions:

(a)  Land within the Quileute Reservation or adjacent to the 
boundaries thereof which is not now in Indian ownership, may be 
purchased by or for the Quileute Tribe.

(b)  Restricted land, which is in heirship status at the time of 
the adoption and approval of this Constitution, may be purchased 
by or for the Tribe, with the consent of all the adult heirs, and the 
legal guardians of minor heirs, payment therefor to be made as may 
be agreed upon.

(c)  Land owned by any member of the Tribe who is over the 
age of sixty (60) years, or who is physically incapacitated, may be 
transferred by its owner to the Tribe in exchange for a pension of 
not more than twice the annual rental value of the land for the life 
of the pensioner, to be paid out of available tribal funds.

(d)  Land owned by any member of the Tribe in excess of his 
needs for domestic purposes may be purchased by the Tribe with 

the consent of the owner, payments to be made on such terms as 
may be agreed upon by the Council and the owner.

(e)  Land owned by any members of the Tribe who desire to leave 
the reservation permanently may be purchased by the Tribe under 
such terms as may be agreed upon.

Sec. 13. Method of making assignments.—Applications for assign
ment shall be filed with the Secretary of the Council and shall be 
in writing, setting forth the name of the person or persons applying 
for the land and as accurate a description of the land desired as the 
circumstances will permit.

Notices of all applications received by the Secretary shall be 
posted by him in the Agency office and in at least three conspicuous 
places on the reservation for not less than twenty (20) days before 
action is taken by the Council. Any member of the Tribe wishing 
to oppose the granting of an assignment shall do so in writing, 
setting forth his objections, to be filed with the Secretary of the 
Council, and may if he so desires, appear before the Council to 
present evidence. The Secretary of the Council shall furnish the 
Superintendent or other officers in charge of the agency a complete 
record of all action taken by the Council on applications for assign
ment of land, and a complete record of assignments shall be kept 
in the agency office and shall be open for inspection by members of 
the Tribe.

The Council shall draw up one or more forms for standard and 
exchange assignments, which shall be subject to the approval of 
the Secretary of the Interior.

Article IX—Referendum

Upon a petition of at least one-third (1/3) of the qualified voters 
of the Quileute Tribe, a referendum may be demanded on any enacted 
or proposed ordinance or resolution of the Tribal Council, and the 
vote of the majority of the qualified voters in such referendum shall 
be conclusive and binding on the Tribal Council.

Article X—Amendments

This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the Tribe voting at an election called 
for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided that at 
least thirty (30) percent of those entitled to vote shall vote in such 
election; but no amendment shall become effective until it shall 
have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment upon receipt of a petition 
signed by one-third (1/3) of the qualified voters, members of the 
Tribe.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE QUILEUTE TRIBE OF THE QUILEUTE RESERVATION

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. Chairman of the council.—The Chairman of the Coun
cil shall preside over all meetings of the Council; shall perform all 

duties of the Chairman and exercise any authority delegated to him 
by the Council. The Chairman shall also preside at all regular and 
special meetings of a general tribal nature. He shall vote only 
in the case of a tie.

Section 2. Vice-chairman of the council.—The Vice-Chairman 
shall assist the Chairman when called upon so to do. In the absence 
of the Chairman, he shall preside. When so presiding, he shall have 
all the rights, privileges, duties and responsibilities of the Chairman.
Section 3. Secretary of the council.—The Secretary of the Tribal 
Council shall conduct all tribal correspondence and shall keep an 
accurate record of all business transacted at Council meetings. It 
shall be his duty to keep minutes of regular and special Council 
or general tribal meetings and to submit copies of such minutes 
to the Superintendent of the jurisdiction and also to the Commis
sioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 4. Treasurer of the council.—The Treasurer of the Tribal 
Council shall account for, receive, receipt for, preserve and safe
guard all funds in the custody of the Council, whether the same 
be tribal or other funds for which the Council is acting as trustee 
or custodian. Deposits of such funds shall be made in a bank or 
elsewhere, as designated by the Council, and he shall make and 
preserve a financial record of all such funds and shall report on 
all receipts and expenditures, and the amount and nature of all 
funds in his possession or custody, such report being made in writing 
to the Council at regular meetings, and at such other times as 
requested by the Council. He shall not pay out or otherwise 
disburse any funds in his possession or custody, or in the possession 
or custody of the Council, until properly authorized so to do by 
resolution duly passed by the Council.

The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at least 
once each year by a competent auditor employed by the Council and 
at such other times as the Council or the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs may direct.

The Treasurer shall be required to furnish a bond satisfactory to 
the Council and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, and the 
Council is hereby authorized to pay the premium on such bond from 
any available funds. The Treasurer shall be present at all special 
or regular meetings of the Council.

Sec. 5. Duties of appointive officers and hoards.—The duties of 
all appointive boards or officers of the Council shall be clearly 
defined by resolution of the Council at the time of their creation or 
appointment. Such boards and officers shall report from time to 
time, as required, to the Council, and their activities and decisions 
shall be subject to review by the Council upon the complaint of any 
person aggrieved.

Article II—Certificate of Election

It shall be the duty of the Tribal Council, or a board appointed 
by them, to certify to the election of the newly elected Tribal Council 
members within five (5) days after the election and thereupon they 
shall be notified by the Secretary of their election.

Article III—Installation of Officers and Council Members

Newly elected members who have been duly certified shall be in
stalled thereafter at the next regular meeting of the Tribal Council. 
Each member of the Tribal Council and each officer or subordinate 
officer, elected or appointed hereunder, shall take an oath of office 
prior to assuming the duties thereof, by which oath he shall pledge 
himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United States 
and this Constitution and By-laws.

Oath: “I, __________________________ , do solemnly swear
that I will support and defend the Constitution of the United States 
and the Constitution of the Quileute Tribe against all enemies; that 
I will carry out, faithfully and impartially, the duties of my office to 
the best of my ability; that I will cooperate, promote, and protect 
the best interests of my Tribe, in accordance with its Constitution 
and By-laws.”

Article IV—Compensation

The Tribal Council may prescribe such compensation of officers or 
members of the Council as it deems advisable from such funds as may 
be available, subject to approval of the general tribal meeting.

Article V—Time and Place of Meetings

Section 1. Meetings.—Regular meetings of. the Tribal Council 
shall be held at La Push, Washington, on the last Monday of June 
and December, and at such other times as the Council may by 
resolution designate. 

Special meetings may be called by the Chairman or by written 
notice signed by the majority of the Tribal Council and when so 
called, the Tribal Council shall have power to transact business as in 
regular meetings.

Sec. 2. Quorum.—No business shall be transacted unless a quorum 
is present. A quorum shall consist of four (4) Council members.
Sec. 3. Order of business.—The following order of business is 

.

established for all meetings;

1.  Call to order by Chairman.
2.  Roll call.
3.  Reading the minutes of last meeting.
4.  Unfinished business.
5.  Reports.
6.  New business.
7.  Adjournment.

Sec. 4. Ordinances and resolutions.—All final decisions of the 
Tribal Council on matters of general and permanent interest to the 
members of the Tribe shall be embodied in ordinances. Such ord
inances shall be collected and published from time to time for the 
information and education of the members of the Tribe.

All final decisions of the Tribal Council in matters of temporary 
interest (such as action on the tribal budget for a single year or 
petitions to Congress or the Secretary of the Interior) or relating 
especially to particular individuals or officials (such as adoption of 

members, instructions for tribal employees or rules of order for the 
Tribal Council) shall be embodied in resolutions. Such resolutions 
shall be recorded in a special book which shall be open to public 
inspection.

All questions of procedure (such as acceptance of committee re
ports or invitations to outsiders to speak) shall be decided by action 
of the Tribal Council or by the ruling of the Chairman if no objec
tion is heard.

In all ordinances, resolutions, or motions, the Tribal Council may 
act by majority vote, but all matters of importance shall be fully 
discussed and a reasonable attempt shall be made to secure unani
mous agreement.

Every ordinance shall begin with the words: “Be it enacted by the 

Quileute Tribal Council-----

the Quileute Tribal Council-----

Every resolution shall begin with the words: “Be it resolved by 

Article VI—General Tribal Meetings

Section 1. There shall be an annual general tribal meeting open 
to all members of the Tribe, held at La Push, Washington, on the last 
Monday in December. At this meeting, elections shall be held as 
designated heretofore in this Constitution. The by-laws, orders and 
resolutions, which are subject to approval at the general tribal meet
ing, shall be taken up for consideration at this time.

It shall also be the duty of the Chairman to make a report of the 
activities of the Council throughout the year, and to outline proposed 
plans for economic and social betterment of the Tribe.

Sec. 2. Special general tribal meetings may be called by the Chair
man of the Tribal Council provided that due notice is posted through
out the reservation at least fifteen days prior to such meeting.

One-third (1/3) of the legal voters of the Tribe may at any time, by 
written petition, call a general tribal meeting provided that at least 
fifteen days’ notice is posted throughout the reservation.

Article VII—Adoption of Constitution and By-Laws

This Constitution and By-laws, when ratified by a majority vote of 
the qualified voters of the Quileute Tribe of the Quileute Reservation 
voting at an election called for the purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior, provided that at least thirty (30) percent of those entitled 
to vote shall vote in such election, shall be submitted to the Secretary 
of the Interior, and, if approved, shall be effective from the date of 
approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved September 12, 1936, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Quileute Tribe of 
the Quileute Reservation and was on October 10, 1936, duly adopted 
by a vote of 37 for, and 12 against, in an election in which over 
30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance

with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934, 
(48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935, (49 Stat. 
378).

Morton Penn, 
Chairman of Election Board.

Sarah Woodruff, 

Secretary of Election Board.

W. O. Nicholson, 

Superintendent in charge of the reservation.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Quileute Tribe of the 
Quileute Reservation.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
or By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the Quileute Tribe of 
the Quileute Reservation.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended November 6, 1936.

Wieliam Zimmerman, Jr.,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.
[seal] 

Washington, D. C., November 11, 1936.

