 
  
  
 UNITED STATES 
 

DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

 
 + 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 
COVELO INDIAN COMMUNITY 
CALIFORNIA


 
  
  
 APPROVED DECEMBER 16, 1936 
 

UNITED STATES

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1937 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE COVELO INDIAN 
COMMUNITY

PREAMBLE


We, the Indians of the Round Valley Reservation, Mendocino 
County, California, hereby form and authorize a Tribal Council, 
to be known as the Covelo Indian Community Council, and do ordain 
and establish this Constitution and By-laws as an expression of the 
aims and purposes of this community and as a guide to the delibera
tions of the Community and its Council.

Article I—Object and Purpose

The object and purpose of this organization shall be to promote 
the social and economic welfare of the members of the Covelo Indian 
Community under the principles and policies of the Indian Reor
ganization Act. Nothing in this Constitution and By-laws shall 
be interpreted to jeopardize or deprive any member of the Covelo 
Indian Community of the rights of his American citizenship.

Article II—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Covelo Indian Community shall extend to 
all tribal and trust land within the original boundaries of the Round 
Valley Reservation and to all lands that have been, or may be here
after added thereto under any law of the United States, except as 
otherwise provided by law.

Article III—Membership

Section 1. Membership in this Community shall consist of:
(a)  All Indians who are on the original allotment rolls of the 
Round Valley Reservation and their descendants now living on the 
Round Valley Reservation;

(b)  All children born to any member of the Covelo Indian Com
munity who is a resident of the Round Valley Reservation at the 
time of birth of said children.

Sec. 2. Descendants of the original allottees living outside the 
Reservation shall be eligible for membership upon application in 
writing, under such rules and regulations as may be set up by the 
Council, provided their degree of Indian blood is not less than one- 
quarter.

Sec. 3. Any member of the Community who absents himself for 
a continuous period of one year, without prior leave of absence from 
the Council, shall be automatically dropped from the membership 
rolls and may be reinstated only upon application as prescribed for 
new membership.

Sec. 4. Reinstatement shall be by written application to the Coun
cil and shall require a two-thirds (2/3) vote of the Comm unity 
Council.

Sec. 5. The Covelo Indian Community Council shall have the 
power to promulgate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, covering future membership, loss of membership, 
and the adoption of new members.

Article IV—Organization of Governing Body

Section 1. The affairs of the Covelo Indian Community shall be 
administered by a Council composed of seven (7) members, duly 
elected by secret ballot, by a majority of the qualified voters of the 
Community who actually vote at the election.

Sec. 2. The first election of the Council shall be called by the 
Superintendent of the Sacramento Indian Agency within thirty 
(30) days after the adoption and approval of this Constitution, and 
the election shall be supervised by him or his representative.

Sec. 3. The four members receiving the highest vote at this elec
tion shall hold office for four years from the first Monday in March 
1937, and until their successors are elected; the remaining three 
members shall hold office for a period of two years from the same 
date and until their successors are elected for a term of four years 
thereafter.

Sec. 4. Future elections shall be held, under the supervision of 
the Community Council, on the first Monday of March of each two- 
year period beginning with March 1938, and notice of such elections 
shall be posted in at least three conspicuous places in the Community 
at least thirty (30) days prior to the date of such election. Voting 
shall be held at such places as may be designated by the Council.
Sec. 5. Within fifteen (15) days from the date of the first elec
tion the Council shall assemble and perfect its organization by elect
ing from its own members a President and Vice-President, who shall 
hold office until the third Monday in March 1938, and thereafter 
such officers shall be elected annually at the regular March meeting 
of the Council. The Council shall elect from its own membership 
or from the Community, a Secretary, a Treasurer, and a Sergeant- 
at-Arms. who shall hold office until the third Monday in March 
1938, and thereafter such officers shall be elected annually at the 
regular March meeting of the Council. Such Secretary. Treasurer, 
and Sergeant-at-Arms when selected from the Community shall not 
be considered members of the Council.

Article V—Powers of Self-Government

Section. 1. The Council shall have power, subject to the limita
tions imposed by the Constitution and laws of the United States, to 
negotiate with Government Agencies; to employ legal counsel, the 
choice of counsel and fixing of fees to be subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior; to prevent the disposition of Community 
assets without its consent; to advise the Secretary of the Interior 
on any appropriation estimates which concern the Community: to 
exercise control over all assets within the exclusive possession of the 
Community; to make appropriations of any available community 

funds for community purposes; to requisition labor for public pur
poses: to make rules and regulations for taxation of members, sub
ject to referendum of the people; to impose license fees on non
members. subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior; 
to make rules and regulations governing trespass; to regulate hunt
ing and fishing within the boundaries of the Community; to pro
mulgate ordinances subject to review by the Secretary of the In
terior governing the conduct of members of the Community; to 
appoint peace officers; to condemn the property of its members for 
public purposes in Courts of competent jurisdiction and to pay fair 
compensation for same; to supervise all elections.

Sec. 2. Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this 
Constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Reservation, who 
shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or disapprove the 
same.

If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Sec
retary of the Interior, who may. within ninety (90) days from the 
date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any 
cause, by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within ten (10) days after its enact
ment, he shall advise the Covelo Indian Community Council of his 
reasons therefor. If these reasons appear to the Council insufficient, 
it may, by a majority vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the 
Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from 
the date of its enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon 
the said ordinance or resolution shall become effective.

Sec. 3. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Indians 
of the Round Valley Reservation but not expressly referred to in 
this Constitution shall not be abridged by this Article, but may be 
exercised by the people of the Covelo Community through the adop
tion of appropriate By-laws and constitutional amendments.

Article VI—Conduct of Elections and Nominations

Section 1. All adult members of the Community in good standing 
who have resided in the Community for a period of one year and 
who have attained the age of twenty-one (21) years on or prior to 
rhe day of election, shall be qualified to vote.

Sec. 2. The polls shall be open at 12 noon and close at 8:00 p. m.
Sec. 3. Voting shall be by secret ballot.
Sec. 4. For the purpose of the first election, the Community, at 
a public meeting, shall elect a committee to select the candidates 
for the Community Council. Further nominations may be made 
from the floor. The members of the Community shall then pro
ceed with the election of the Council in accordance with Section 3, 
of this Article.

Sec. 5. For future elections any member of the Community whose 
name is presented at least fifteen (15) days prior to an election, to 
the Secretary of the Council by petition signed by at least ten adult 
members of the Community, shall be declared by the Council to be 

regularly nominated and to be a candidate for the office of council
man. The Secretary of the Council shall post the list of candidates 
in one or more public places ten (10) days before the date of 
election.

Article VII—Removal From Office

Section 1. Councilmen who shall have absented themselves from 
three consecutive regular meetings of the Council may be removed at 
the discretion of the Council; any councilman absenting himself 
from five consecutive regular meetings shall be removed from office. 
Any councilman convicted of a crime or of tendering or accepting 
a bribe, shall be summarily removed from office, but no councilman 
may be removed under this section unless he shall be given a written 
copy of the charges against him, and shall be given an opportunity 
to be heard at a regular meeting of the Council. No councilman 
may be summarily removed except by a two-thirds (%) vote of the 
Council.

Sec. 2. Any councilman may be suspended for cause by a two- 
thirds (2/3) vote of the Council, after written charges have been 
preferred against him. These charges must be sustained by a ma
jority vote at a special meeting of the Community called by the 
Council within thirty (30) days after such suspension: Provided, 
That if the charges are not sustained by a majority vote at said 
special meeting, the suspension shall be immediately revoked: And 
provided further, That the failure of the Council to call a meeting 
of the Community to hear charges against a councilman within 
thirty (30) days after his suspension shall end such suspension.

Sec. 3. The members of the Community shall have the power to 
recall any member of the Council by filing a petition with the Sec
retary of the Council, signed by at least fifty (50) qualified voters, 
asking for the removal of said member of the Council, subject to 
the decision of a special election which shall be held within thirty 
(30) days from the filing of the petition.

Sec. 4. A vacancy occurring within six months of the expiration 
of the term of office of a councilman shall be filled by an appointment 
made by a two-thirds vote of the Council; other vacancies shall be 
filled by special elections called for the purpose in the manner pre
scribed for the regular election of councilmen.

Article VIII—Popular Participation in Government

Section 1. The Tribal Council shall meet quarterly on the first 

Monday of March, July, October and January.

Sec. 2. All regular meetings of the Council shall be open to mem
bers of the Community as auditors. Records of the Council shall 
be open to any members of the Community.

Sec. 3. There shall be two meetings annually of the Council with 
the Community for the purpose of reviewing the acts of the Council 
for the preceding period of six months.

Sec. 4. The members of the Community may, by a petition signed 
by not less than fifty (50) voters of the Community, initiate any 
measure they deem advisable. This petition shall be filed with the 
Secretary of the Council. It shall be the duty of the Council to 

call a special meeting of the voters within a period of thirty (30) 
days from the filing of such petition to vote upon the measure.

Sec. 5. The members of the Community shall have the right, 
through a petition signed by not less than fifty (50) voters of the 
Community, to call a special election to revoke any act of the Council. 
It shall be the duty of the Council to call such election within thirty 
(30) days from the date of the filing of such petition with the 
Secretary of the Council.

Article IX—Land

Section 1. Equitable title to existing Community land or land 
which may be acquired in the future shall be vested in the Covelo 
Indian Community.

Sec. 2. The Council shall make all assignments of land. Any 
member of the Community who has received a standard assignment 
may hold, use and enjoy life tenure, provided land must be used 
in an intelligent and husband-like manner. Any attempt by the 
assignee to lease the land either on a cash or share-crop basis, shall 
be sufficient cause for cancellation of standard assignments. It shall 
be the duty of the Council to revoke standard assignments, (1) for 
non-use after a period of two years, and (2) for any attempt of as
signee to lease same. In case of physical disability of assignee, the 
Council by a two-thirds (2/3) majority, may grant the assignee per
mission to lease his assignment, provided such permission shall in 
no event extend beyond a total period of two years during the life 
of the assignment, except upon special dispensation of the Council.
Sec. 3. At the death of a standard assignee, his heirs shall be given 
preference in the reassignment of the land, provided such persons are 
landless members of the tribe who would be eligible to receive a 
“standard assignment.”

Sec. 4. Any head of a family shall be entitled to a standard assign
ment of land provided he deeds to the Covelo Indian Community any 
land held in trust, or interest in land held in trust, which he may 
own at the time of such assignment. The amount of such assignment 
shall be based upon a calculation of the amount and quality of the 
land available for assignment, the number of applicants and the 
dependents in each family, and the expectancy of inheriting land.

Sec. 5. The Council may make assignments in exchange for allot

ments.

Sec. 6. Unassigned Community land may be leased to individual 
members or associations of members of the Community at a price 
per acre fixed by the Council, and for a period not exceeding five 
years. The proceeds from such leases shall be deposited in the treas
ury of the Covelo Indian Community and used for the benefit of said 
Community.

Sec. 7. Nothing in this Constitution shall be construed as impairing 
any existing right of private ownership now held under the State, 
County, or Federal Government.

Sec. 8. Appeals from the Acts of the Council in land matters may 
be taken to the Secretary of the Interior, whose decision shall be 
binding upon both the Council and the member concerned.

Sec. 9. The Covelo Indian Community shall have power to pro
mulgate ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the In

terior, regulating the use, assignment, leasing and inheritance of lands 
and the ownership and disposition of improvements thereon.

Article X—Amendments

Section 1. This Constitution and By-laws may be amended by a 
majority vote of the qualified voters of the Community voting at an 
election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, pro
vided that at least thirty (30) per cent of those entitled to vote shall 
vote in such election; but no amendment shall become effective until 
it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to call an 
election on any proposed amendment upon receipt of a petition signed 
by one-third (1/3) of the qualified voters, members of the Community.
Sec. 2. Before an election on any proposed amendment is requested, 
it shall be submitted in writing and read at any regular meeting of 
the Community or special meeting called for that purpose, to be held 
at least ten (10) days before such election.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE COVELO INDIAN COMMUNITY

 
 Article I

Each member of the Community Council and each officer or sub
ordinate officer, elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath 
of office prior to assuming the duties thereof; by which oath he shall 
pledge himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United 
States and this Constitution and By-laws.

(Oath) : I,_____________________, do solemnly swear that I
will faithfully support the Constitution of the United States and 
the Constitution and By-laws of the Covelo Indian Community, and 
that in all measures which may come before me I will conduct my
self so as to advance the interests and prosperity of the Covelo Indian 
Community.

Article II

It shall be the duty of the President of the Community Council 
to preside at all meetings of the Community Council and to carry 
out all orders of the Council. The President of the Council shall 
also preside at the general Community meetings. The President shall 
also be the chief executive officer of the Community.

Article III

The Vice-President shall discharge the duties of the office of the 
President of the Community Council in the absence or disability of 
the President of the Council, or when called upon by him to do so.

Article IV

The Secretary shall keep a full report of all proceedings of each 
regular and special meeting of the Council and shall perform such 
other duties of like nature as the Council shall from time to time 
by resolution provide. He shall transmit copies of the minutes of 
each meeting to the Superintendent of the Sacramento Indian

Agency. The Secretary shall also attend to the correspondence of 
the Community Council under the direction of the President of the 
Community Council. He shall at all times maintain an accurate 
record of the Community membership.

Article V

The Treasurer of the Council shall be the custodian of all moneys 
which come under the jurisdiction or into control of the Covelo 
Indian Community Council. He shall pay out money in accordance 
with the orders and resolutions of the Council. He shall keep 
account of all receipts and disbursements and shall report the same 
to the Council at each regular meeting. He shall be bonded in such 
an amount as the Council may by resolution provide subject to 
approval by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

The books of the Council Treasurer shall be subject to audit or 
inspection at the direction of the Council or of the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs. Until the Treasurer is bonded, the Community 
Council may make such provision for the custody and disbursements 
of funds as shall guarantee their safety and proper disbursements 
and use.

Article VI

It shall be the duty of the Sergeant-at-Arms to preserve order at 
all meetings and to perform such duties as the Community Council 
may assign to him.

Article VII

The subordinate officers or members of committees shall perform 
such duties as the Council by resolution shall from time to time 
provide.

Article VIII

The officers of the Covelo Indian Community may receive such 
compensation as may be determined by the Council, from such funds 
as may be available.

Article IX

The order of business at any regular or special meeting of the 

Council shall be as follows:

1.  Council called to Order.
2.  Roll Call.
3.  Reading of Minutes of Previous Meeting.
4.  Reports of Committees.
5.  Report of the Council Treasurer.
6.  Unfinished Business.
7.  New Business.
8.  Adjournment.

Article X

This Constitution and By-laws, when ratified by a majority vote of 
the qualified voters of the Indians of the Round Valley Reservation 
voting at a special election called for the purpose by the Secretary 
of the Interior, provided that at least thirty (30) per cent of those 

entitled to vote shall vote in such election, shall be submitted to the 
Secretary of the Interior, and, if approved, shall be effective from the 
date of approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved September 21, 1936, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was sub
mitted for ratification to the Indians of the Round Valley Reserva
tion, Mendocino County, California, and was on November 7, 1936, 
duly approved by a vote of 60 for, and 20 against, in an election 
in which over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, 
in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 
1935 (49 Stat. 378).

. 

Roy Nash, Superintendent.

Arthur Anderson,
Chairman of Election Board.
Welsey McLane, 
Secretary of Election Board.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the act 
of June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Indians of the Round 
Valley Reservation, Mendocino County, California.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affiairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution or 
By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended December 11, 1936.

John Collier,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Washington, D. C., December 16, 1936.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior. 
[seal]

