 
  
  
 United States Department of the Interior 
 

BUREAU OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 
 
 Washington, D.C. 20240 
 

FN REPLY REFER TO

TRIBAL GOVERNMENT SERVICES - TR 

2611 MS/MIB

THROUGH: SACRAMENTO AREA OFFICE

SEP 14 1994

Mr. Harold Brafford
Superintendent, Central California Agency
Bureau of Indian Affairs
1824 Tribute Road
Sacramento, California 95815

Dear Mr. Brafford;

We have received the results of the election held on August 3, 1994, by the qualified voters of the 
Covelo Indian Community of the Round Valley Reservation. The election was called in accordance with 
an order issued on April 22, 1994, which permitted the qualified voters of the Community to vote on 
the adoption or rejection of a proposed revised Constitution of the Round Valley Indian Tribes. Among 
other things, the proposed revised constitution changed the name of the tribal entity from the Covelo 
Indian Community of the Round Valley Reservation to the Round Valley Indian Tribes.

As evidenced by the completed Certificate of Results of Election, the proposed Constitution of the Round 
Valley Indian Tribes was duly adopted on August 3, 1994, by a vote of 98 for and 45 against in an 
election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 223 members registered and entitled to vote cast 
their ballots.

The Constitution of the Round Valley Indian Tribes, as adopted on August 3, 1994, is hereby approved 
pursuant to the authority delegated to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 
984), as amended, and delegatee to me by 230 D.M. 2.4. Please deliver the enclosed approved original 
document to the Tribe.

Sincerely,

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs
 
 

CONSTITUTION 
OF THE 
ROUND VALLEY INDIAN TRIBES

PREAMBLE

 
 We the people of the Round Valley Indian Tribes of the Round Valley 
Reservation, a federally recognized sovereign Indian tribe, do hereby adopt 
this Constitution in order to:

o promote the social and economic welfare of the members of the Tribe, 
o protect the rights of our members,
o protect our land, timber, fish, wildlife, water and natural 

resources,

o preserve and protect our heritage including our cultural values and 

traditions, build a stronger tribal government,
o promote honor, dignity and respect among the Tribe,
o acquire additional lands for the benefit of the Tribe and its 

members, promote tribal businesses and enterprises,

o preserve, secure and exercise all the inherent sovereign rights and 

powers of an Indian tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE I - TERRITORY AND JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. Territory. The territory of the Tribe shall include all 
lands within the original boundaries of the Round Valley Reservation, and 
to any and all lands which the Tribe may acquire for itself or which the 
United States may acquire for the benefit of the Tribe or its members. The 
territory of the Tribe shall include all lands, property, airspace, surface 
rights, subsurface rights, other natural resources and any interest therein, 
tenements, hereditaments, all water rights and all accretions, which are 
either new or in the future owned by the Tribe or owned by the United States 
for the benefit of the Tribe or for individual tribal members, 
notwithstanding the issuance of any right-of-way.

Section 2. Jurisdiction. The Tribe shall have jurisdiction over all 
persons, subjects, property, and all activities occurring within the 
boundaries of the Reservation or on other lands within its territory as 
defined by this Article. Nothing in this Article shall be construed to limit 
the ability of the Tribe to exercise its jurisdiction to the fullest extent 
according to Federal law or based upon its inherent sovereignty as an Indian 
tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 Section 1.  Requirements. The membership of the Tribe shall consist of:

(a)  All persons who were qualified for and have been accepted into 
membership in the Covelo Indian Community under the membership 
requirements contained in the Constitution and Bylaws approved 
December 16, 1936, as amended, now superseded by this Constitution.

(b)  Lineal descendants of members of the Tribe who are admitted into 
membership according to enrollment procedures established by 
ordinance, provided, that the person demonstrates a willingness to 
maintain tribal affiliations.

Section 2.  No Dual Enrollment. Any member of the Tribe who is or 
becomes a member of any other federally recognized Indian tribe may be 
disenrolled by the Tribal Council.

Section 3.  Membership Roll.

(a)  The  Tribal  Council  shall  maintain a current membership roll of

tribal members.

(b)  The  Tribal  Council  shall  have the authority to make corrections

to the membership roll by removing the names of persons who 
do not meet the requirements for membership and adding the names 
of persons who have been emitted through error or mistake, 
provided, that the Tribal Council shall provide any person 
subject to disenrollment full due process rights including 
adequate notice of all pending actions and a hearing before 
the Tribal Council with the right to present witnesses and 
other evidence.

(c)  Any adult person who has voluntarily requested to be removed 
from the membership roll cannot re-enroll with the Tribe, All 
relinquishments of membership in the Tribe shall be done in 
writing.

Section 4.  Membership_ Ordinance. The Tribal Council shall have the 
power to adopt a membership ordinance not inconsistent with the terms of this 
Constitution covering all enrollment procedures.

Section 5.  Appeal. Any person whose application for enrollment is 
rejected or who has been disenrolled from the Tribe shall have the right to 
appeal to the Tribal Court in accordance with the applicable procedures 
contained in the enrollment ordinance.
 
 

ARTICLE III - ORGANIZATION OF THE GOVERNMENT

 
 The government of the Tribe shall be composed of the Legislative branch 
which shall be known as the Tribal Council, the Executive branch which shall 
be known as the Tribal Administration, and the Judicial branch which shall be 
known as the Tribal Court. The Tribal Council shall operate in accordance 
with Article IV. The Tribal Administration shall be subordinate to the 
Tribal Council and shall operate in accordance with Article VII. The Tribal 
Court shall operate in accordance with Article VI. No person or group of 
persons charged with the exercise of powers properly belonging to one of 
these departments shall exercise any of the powers properly belonging to 
either of the others, except as this Constitution may otherwise expressly 
direct or permit.
 
 

ARTICLE IV - THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1.  Tribal Council. The governing body of the Tribe shall be 
known as the Round Valley Tribal Council which shall consist of seven (7) 
members including the President and Vice President. All members of the 
Tribal Council shall have the right to vote on all matters.

Section 2.  Terms of Office. The terms of office for all Tribal Council 
members including the President and Vice President shall be four (4) years or 
until a successor is chosen and seated. The terms of office shall be staggered 
in accordance with Article XVI.

Section 3.  Selection of Officers. The Tribal Council shall select a 
President and a Vice President from within the Tribal Council membership who 
shall each serve a four (4) year term or until successors are chosen and 
seated. The Tribal Council shall select a secretary, a treasurer and a 
sergeant-at-arms from within the Tribal Council membership.

Section 4.  Cuties of the Officers. The duties of the President, Vice 
President, secretary, treasurer, and sergeant-at-arms, and any compensation, 
shall be established by ordinance.

Section 5.  Tribal Council Compensation. Tribal Council members may 
receive reasonable compensation for attending Tribal Council meetings so long 
as the member stays for the entire meeting.

Section 6.  Meetings of the Tribal Council.

(a)  The Tribal Council shall hold a regular meeting on the second 
Saturday of each month. All regular meetings of the Tribal Council 
shall be opened to tribal members. The Tribal Council may, upon 
motion duly passed, go into executive session.

(b)  The President or any three (3) members of the Tribal Council may call 
special meetings of the Tribal Council. Notice of all special 
meetings shall be provided to all members of the Tribal Council.

Section 7. Quorum Four (4) or more members of the Tribal Council shall 
constitute a quorum at any regular or special meeting. A quorum is required at 
all meetings in order to conduct official business of the Tribal Council.

Section 8.  Voting. All decisions of the Tribal Council shall be by 
majority vote unless otherwise indicated in this Constitution. Proxy voting 
shall be prohibited.

Section 9.  Conflict of Interest. Any Tribal Council member who may have 
a direct personal or financial interest in any matter before the Tribal Council 
which is not similarly shared by all members of the Tribal Council shall not 
vote on such matter without the consent of the remaining members of the Tribal 
Council.

Section 10.  Removal.

(a)  The Tribal Council shall remove a Council member for any of the 
following reasons so long as the actions in question take place 
during the Council member's term of office:

(1)  Failure to attend three (3) regular meetings consecutively 
absent good cause as defined by ordinance. The ordinance 
shall include provisions for leave for the following reasons: 
emergencies, illness, death in the immediate family, reasonable 
vacation, failure to receive adequate notice of a meeting, and 
circumstances beyond the Council member's control.

(2)  Final conviction by any tribal, Federal or state court of any of 

the following offenses;

(i)  a felony,

(ii)  two (2) misdemeanors.

(b)  A Tribal Council member appealing a conviction of an offense listed 
in Section 10 (a) (2) of this Article shall be suspended pending the 
outcome of the final appeal.

(c)  Any Tribal Council member facing removal under this Section shall be 
afforded full due process rights including being given a written copy 
of the charges, being given an opportunity to present witnesses and 
other evidence and to otherwise respond to those charges at a hearing 
before the Tribal Council. The Tribal Court shall have jurisdiction 
to review removal actions and can overturn a removal if the Tribal 
Council's findings of fact have been arbitrary or capricious.

Section 11.  Recall.

(a)  Any adult tribal member may initiate recall proceedings against any 
Tribal Council member by filing with the Election Board a written 
statement giving specific reasons why the Council member should be 
recalled.

(b)  After receipt of the written statement, the Election Board shall 
issue official petition forms to the tribal member who initiated the 
recall. The official petition forms shall include at the top of each 
page the list of allegations for recall. The tribal member shall 
have thirty (30) days to collect the signatures from thirty-three 
percent (33%) of the eligible voters of the Tribe. The Election 
Board shall inform the tribal member of the number of signatures 
required for a valid recall petition.

(c)  Once a tribal member has signed an official petition form his or her 

name shall not be removed from the form.

(d)  Individual petition forms shall be circulated for each Tribal Council 
member subject to recall. A maximum of three (3) Tribal Council 
members may be recalled at a time.

(e)  The Election Board shall verify the signatures on a recall petition 
in a timely manner. If a petition contains the required number of 
signatures and has been properly submitted then the Election Board 
shall call and hold a recall meeting within thirty (30) days of 
receipt of the petition before holding a special recall election.

(f)  The Election Board shall provide adequate notice of the recall 
meeting. The notice shall include a statement that the person(s) 
subject to recall shall be provided with an opportunity to respond to 
the charges at the meeting. The Election Board shall conduct all 
recall meetings in an orderly and fair manner.

(g)  The Election Board shall conduct a special recall election within 
thirty (30) days of the recall meeting. The ballots for the special 
recall election shall include a list of the charges and the response, 
if any, from the person(s) subject to recall.

(h)  A majority vote of the eligible voters shall determine the success or 
failure of the recall petition(s), provided, that at least 
thirty-three percent (33%) of the eligible voters actually vote in 
the special recall election.

(i)  If the special recall election fails, then the charges used to 
initiate the recall cannot be used to initiate another recall for the 
remainder of the Council member's term of office.

(j)  If the special recall election succeeds and the person(s) is 
successfully recalled, then he or she shall not be eligible to run 
for Tribal Council office until after his or her terra would have 
ended.

(k)  A special election to fill a possible vacancy created by a recall 

election shall be conducted at the same time as such recall election.

Section 12.  Code of Ethics. The Tribal Council shall have the power to 
adopt a Oode of Ethics governing the conduct of 
 officials and employees. 
The Code of Ethics may include disciplinary provisions including removal so 
long as the person in question is afforded full due process rights including 
being informed of the charges and being given an opportunity to present 
witnesses and other evidence at a hearing before the Tribal Council.

tribal
 
 

ARTICLE V - POWERS OF THE TRIBAL COUNCIL

 
 Section 1. Powers of the Tribal Council. The Tribal Council shall have 
all legislative powers vested in the Tribe through its inherent sovereignty and 
Federal law and shall, in accordance with established practices of the Tribe 
and subject to the express limitations contained in this Constitution and the 
applicable laws of the United States, have the following powers:

(a)  to represent the Tribe and act in all matters that concern the 
welfare of the Tribe, and to make decisions not inconsistent with 
or contrary to this Constitution;

(b)  to negotiate and enter into contracts with Federal, state and local 

governments;

(c)  to regulate its own procedures;

(d)  to employ legal counsel in accordance with applicable law;

(e)  to advise the Secretary of Interior or his representative on all 
activities that may affect the Tribe, and on all appropriation 
estimates and Federal projects for the benefit of the Tribe before 
such estimates and projects are submitted to the Office of Management 
and Budget and to Congress;

(f)  to prevent or veto the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of 
tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets without the 
formal consent of the Tribe;

(g)  to regulate the use and disposition of all lands within the juris

diction of the Tribe, including but not limited to the enactment of 
ordinances providing for the manner of making, holding and revoking 
assignments of tribal lands and interests therein;

(h)  to condemn property for public purposes so long as just compensation 
is paid, provided, that all condemnation proceedings are conducted in 
accordance with applicable law;

(i)  to make rules ard regulations governing trespass upon lands within 

the jurisdiction of the Tribe;

(j)  to regulate hunting, fishing, trapping, logging, mining, camping, 
hiking, recreation, gaming and all other related activities on lands 
within the jurisdiction of the Tribe;

(k)  to exercise control over assets within the control of the Tribe;

(1)  to appropriate and regulate the use of available funds;

(m)  to levy and collect taxes, duties, fees and assessments;

(n)  to charter tribal enterprises, tribal housing authorities, corpora

tions and associations, and to manage and regulate all tribal 
economic affairs and enterprises;

(o)  to regulate domestic relations of persons within the jurisdiction of 

the Tribe through the adoption of an ordinance;

(p)  to enact an ordinance governing law enforcement on lands within the 

jurisdiction of the Tribe;

(q)  to appoint peace officers;

(r)  to appoint subordinate committees, canmissions, boards, tribal 
officials and employees not otherwise provided for in this 
Constitution, and to prescribe their compensation, tenure, duties, 
policies and procedures;

(s)  to determine all terms and conditions of employment for all persons 

employed by the Tribe through the adoption of appropriate ordinances;

(t)  to requisition labor for public purposes in a state of emergency;

(u)  to issue and to regulate motor vehicle license plates;

(v)  to accept grants and donations from any person, organization, 

state or the United States;

(w)  to enact ordinances providing for the removal or exclusion of any 
non-member of the Tribe for cause, and to prescribe conditions upon 
which non-members may remain within the territory of the Tribe, 
provided, that all actions of exclusion or removal shall be done 
by filing an action in Tribal Court;

(x)  to exercise civil jurisdiction over any nan-member of the Tribe to 

the extent permitted by Federal law;

(y) to enact laws, ordinances, and resolutions necessary or incidental to 

the exercise of its legislative powers;

(z) to take any and all actions necessary and proper for the exercise of 
the foregoing powers and duties, including those powers and duties 
not enumerate above, and all other powers and duties new or 
hereafter delegated to the Tribal Council, or vested in the Tribe by 
Federal law or through its inherent sovereignty.
 
 

ARTICLE VI - THE JUDICIARY

 
 Section 1.  The Judiciary.  The judicial power of the Tribe shall be

vested in the Judiciary which shall consist of a Tribal Court and a Tribal 
Court of Appeals and other lower courts as deemed necessary by the Tribal 
Council.

Section 2.  Jurisdiction of the Courts. The Judiciary shall exercise 
jurisdiction over all cases and controversies within the jurisdiction of the 
Tribe, in law and equity, whether civil or criminal in nature, that arise 
under this Constitution, the laws and customs of the Tribe, by virtue of the 
Tribe's inherent sovereignty, or by authority vested in the Tribal Courts by 
Federal law.

Section 3.  Power of the Courts. The Judiciary shall have the power to:

(a)  interpret, construe and apply the laws of, or applicable to, the 

Tribe;

(b)  declare the laws of the Tribe void if such laws are not in agreement 

with this Constitution;

(c)  issue injunctions, attachments, writs of mandamus, quo warranto, 
review, certiorari and prohibition, and to issue writs of habeas 
corpus to any part of the Tribe upon petition by, or on behalf of, 
any person held in actual custody;

(d)  establish court procedures for the tribal judiciary, except that the 
Tribal Council may by ordinance alter such procedures consistent with 
this Constitution.

Section 4.  Composition of the Tribal Court. The Tribal Court shall be 
composed of one Chief Judge and such Associate Judges as may be determined 
necessary by the Tribal Council.

Section 5.  Composition of the Tribal Court of Appeals. The Tribal Court 

of Appeals shall consist of one Chief Justice and two Associate Justices.

Section 6.  Appointment of Judges.

(a)  The Tribal Council shall appoint one Chief Judge to the Tribal 
Court. The Chief Judge shall serve for a period of three (3) years. 
The Tribal Council may appoint Associate Judges to the Tribal Court 
who shall serve for periods of two (2) years.

(b)  The Tribal Council shall appoint one Chief Justice to the Tribal 
Court of Appeals who shall serve for a period of four (4) years. The 
Tribal Council shall appoint two Associate Justices to the Tribal 
Court of Appeals who shall serve for periods of three (3) years.

(c)  Should a vacancy occur through death, resignation or otherwise, for 
any of the judicial positions, the Tribal Council shall appoint a 
person or persons to fill such vacancy or vacancies for the remainder 
of the term. All Judges shall be eligible for reappointment.

(d)  All appointments of Judges and Justices shall be made within twelve 

(12) months after the adoption of this Constitution.

Section 7.  Court of Appeals. The Tribal Court of Appeals shall consist 
of one or more Justices selected in sequential order from a list of available 
Tribal Court of Appeals Justices. The Tribal Court of Appeals shall always 
consist of an odd number of Justices. No Justice shall hear a case before the 
Tribal Court of Appeals if he or she presided over the original proceedings or 
if disqualified under Section 10 of this Article.

Section 8.  Qualifications of Judges. The qualifications for Chief Judge 
and any Associate Judges of the Tribal Court shall be established by ordinance 
enacted by the Tribal Council. The Chief Justice of the Tribal Court of 
Appeals and at least one other Associate Justice of the Tribal Court of Appeals 
shall be graduates of an accredited law school. No additional requirements may 
be added during the tenure of any of the Judges or Justices already in office, 
unless the additions exempt the present Judges and Justices during their term.

Section 9.  Compensation. All Judge(s) and Justices shall receive for 
their services reasonable compensation. The Tribal Council shall not diminish 
the compensation of any Judge or Justice during his or her term of office.

Section 10. Disqualification to Act. No Judge or Justice shall be 
qualified to act in any case wherein he or she has any direct interest or 
wherein any relatives by marriage or blood in the first degree is a party.

Section 11. Removal of Judges and Justices.

(a)  The Tribal Council may suspend, dismiss or remove any Judge or 

Justice for any of the following reasons:

(1)  conviction of a felony,

(2)  failure to disqualify himself or herself in accordance with 

Section 10 of this Article,

(3)  unnecessary and repeated lengthy delays in hearing and 

adjudicating matters filed in Tribal Court,

(4)  gross neglect of duty or other good cause.

(b)  The Tribal Council may suspend, dismiss or remove a Judge or Justice 
only by a vote of at least six (6) members of the Tribal Council.

(c)  A Judge or Justice shall be given full due process rights including a 
full and fair opportunity to reply to any and all charges for which 
he may be suspended, dismissed or removed from judicial office.

Section 12. Right to Appeal. Any party to a civil action, or a defendant 
in a criminal action, who is dissatisfied with the judgment or verdict may 
appeal therefrom to the Tribal Court of Appeals. All matters of law and 
procedure may be decided by the Court of Appeals. Findings of fact shall be 
made by the Tribal Court and shall be reviewable only when arbitrary or 
capricious.

Section 13. Court Rules. The duties and procedures of the Judiciary, and 
all other court matters not enumerated in this section of the Constitution, 
shall be established by the Tribal Court of Appeals consistent with the terms 
of this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - THE EXECUTIVE DEPARTMENT

 
 Section 1.  Executive. The Executive Department shall consist of the 
President, Vice President, secretary and treasurer of the Tribal Council and 
such other persons as the Tribal Council or their designee may find necessary 
for the administration of tribal business. The President shall be in charge 
of the Executive Department in accordance with Section 2 of this Article.

Section 2.  Duties. The Executive Department shall oversee the 
administration of tribal business and shall exercise authority delegated by 
the Tribal Council.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. General Elections. General elections to vote for upcoming 
vacancies on the Tribal Council shall be held on the first Tuesday of November 
in even numbered years.

Section 2. Special Elections. Special elections shall be held when 
called for by the Tribal Council, by this Constitution, or by the voters as 
provided in this Constitution or appropriate ordinances. In all special 
elections, adequate notice shall be given to the voters.

Section 3.  Election Board. The Tribal Council shall appoint an Election 
Board consisting of at least four (4) tribal members to conduct all elections 
including all special elections. Election Board members shall serve for two 
(2) year terms. The Tribal Council may remove an Election Board member for 
good cause as defined by ordinance. Election Board members shall receive 
reasonable compensation for their services.

Section 4.  Nominations. Any qualified tribal member may nominate himself 
or herself as a candidate for Tribal Council by submitting his or her name 
along with ten (10) signatures from tribal members to the Election Board. All 
other procedures of nomination including timeframes, official nomination forms, 
and verification of signatures, shall be conducted in accordance with an 
election ordinance adopted by the Tribal Council.

Section 5.  Qualifications for Office.

(a)  Any member of the Tribe shall be eligible as a candidate for tribal 

office if he or she:

(1)  is at least twenty-one (21) years of age; and,

(2)  is a resident of the reservation for at least one (1) year or 

has resided in the Round Valley area for at least one (1) year;
and,

(3)  has no felony convictions within the last eight (8) years; and,

(4)  has a high school degree or its equivalent, or has sufficient 

experience for a position on the Tribal Council.

(b)  The requirement of sufficient experience shall be demonstrated to the 
Election Board. The Election Board shall base its decision on the 
experience of the prospective candidate relevant to the duties of 
the Tribal Council.
 
 

I

 
 (c)  If the Election Board decides that a prospective candidate does not 
have sufficient experience it shall do so in writing giving specific 
reasons for its decision. An adverse decision by the Election Board 
may be appealed to the Tribal Council.

Section 6. Voting Age. All tribal members who reside on the reservation 
for at least one (1) year or reside in the Round Valley area for at least one 
(1) year, and who are age eighteen (18) or older on the date of any tribal 
election shall be entitled to vote in the election.

Section 7.  Secret Ballot. All voting at regular and special elections 

shall be done by secret written ballot.

Section 8.  Absentee Ballots. Absentee voting may be permitted for all 

eligible voters through an ordinance enacted by the Tribal Council.

Section 9. Hours of Voting. The polls shall be open from 8:00 am. to 

8:00 pm.

Section 10. Voting Procedures. The Election Board shall select one of 
its members to serve as the Inspector who shall oversee the election. The 
Election Board shall select a clerk #1 who shall check the names of the voters 
as they arrive on election day on an official roster. The Election Board shall 
select a clerk #2 who shall keep a  sign-in sheet and who shall distribute
ballots to  the eligible voters. 
The Election Board shall select one of its
members to serve as Judge who shall cross-check names of the voters and who 
shall keep a separate roster.  The Election Board may appoint other  persons to
assist with  the election process but  they shall not be members of the Board.

Section 11. Election Notices. All election notices shall be posted at 
least thirty (30) days before the election, except in the case of tie votes, in 
at least four (4) public locations.

Section 12. Election Results. The candidates receiving the highest 
number of votes for the available positions shall be declared the winners for 
those positions. The Election Board shall certify all election results within 
three (3) days of the date of the election. The Tribal Council shall confirm 
the election results within three (3) days after the Election Board certifies 
the election results.

Section 13. Tie Votes. In case of a tie between one or more candidates, 
a run-off election shall be held within thirty (30) days until the tie is 
broken.

Section 14. Oath of Office. The oath of office for newly elected Tribal 
Council members shall be administered not less than sixty (60) but not more 
than ninety (90) days after the Election Board certifies the general election 
results.

Section 15. Challenges to Election Results. Any member of the Tribe may 
challenge the election results by filing a suit in Tribal Court within ten (10) 
days after the Election Board certifies the election results. The Tribal Court 
shall hear and decide election cases within thirty (30) days after the Election 
Board certifies the election results, except where the party challenging the 
results requests additional time which may be granted at the discretion of the 
Tribal Court, provided, that only one thirty-day extension of time may be 
granted. If the Tribal Court invalidates the election results, the Court shall 
order that a new election be held as soon as possible.

Section 16. Vacancies. The Tribal Council shall call a special election 
to fill a vacancy on the Tribal Council unless six (6) months or less remain in 
the term of office for the vacant position, in which case the Tribal Council 
shall appoint a person to fill the position. All persons appointed or elected 
to fill a vacant position shall fill out the term of the person whom he or she 
is replacing.

Section 17. Election Ordinance. The Tribal Council shall have the power 
to adept an election ordinance covering all necessary procedures for both 
general and special elections.
 
 

ARTICLE IX - POPULAR PARTICIPATION IN GOVERNMENT

 
 Section 1. Initiative. The Tribal Council shall submit any proposed 
ordinance or resolution to popular initiative upon petition of at least 
thirty-three percent (33%) of the eligible voters of the Tribe, or upon the 
request of the majority of the members of the Tribal Council. The vote of the 
majority of the eligible voters in such initiative shall decide whether the 
preposed ordinance or resolution shall thereafter be in effect, provided, that 
at least thirty-three percent (33%) of the eligible voters shall vote in such 
initiative.

Section 2. Referendum. The Tribal Council shall submit any enacted 
ordinance, resolution or other official action of the Tribal Council to popular 
referendum upon petition of at least thirty-three percent (33%) of the eligible 
voters of the Tribe or upon the request of the majority of the members of the 
Tribal Council. The vote of the majority of the eligible voters in such 
referendum shall decide whether the enacted ordinance, resolution or other 
official action shall thereafter be in effect, provided, that at least thirty- 
three percent (33%) of the eligible voters shall vote in such referendum.

Section 3.  Official Petition Forms. Official petition forms shall be 
issued by the Tribal Council secretary and shall be circulated and completed 
within ninety (90) days of the date of issuance. The secretary shall notify 
the petitioners in writing of the number of required signatures for a valid 
petition. The Tribal Council shall schedule an election on the proposed 
petition within thirty (30) days of receipt of a valid petition.

Section 4.  Community Meetings. There shall be two meetings annually of 
the Tribal Council with tribal members for the purpose of reviewing the acts of 
the Tribal Council for the preceding six (6) months.
 
 

ARTICLE X  - LAND

 
 Section 1.  Equitable Title. Equitable title to existing tribal land or 

land which may be acquired in the future shall be vested in the Tribe.

Section 2.  Assignments. The Tribal Council shall make all assignments of 
land. Any member of the Tribe who has received a standard assignment may hold, 
use and enjoy life tenure, provided, that land must be used in an intelligent 
and husband-like manner. Any attempt by the assignee to lease the land on 
either a cash or share-crop basis shall be sufficient cause for cancellation of 
standard assignments. It shall be the duty of the Tribal Council to revoke 
standard assignments, (1) for nonuse after a period of two years, and (2) for 
any attempt of assignee to lease same. In case of physical disability of 
assignee, the Tribal Council, by a two-thirds (2/3) majority, may grant the 
assignee permission to lease his assignment, provided, that such permission 
shall in no event extend beyond a total period of two years during the life of 
the assignment, except upon special dispensation of the Tribal Council.

Section 3.  Assignments to Heirs. At the death of a standard assignee, 
his or her heirs shall be given preference in the re-assignment of the land, 
provided, that such persons are members of the Tribe who would be eligible to 
receive a standard assignment.

Section 4.  Inheritance of Lands. The Tribal Council shall have the 
authority to regulate the inheritance of all lands within the jurisdiction of 
the Tribe.

Section 5.  Trust Deeds for Assignments. Any head of a family shall be 
entitled to a standard assignment of land provided he deeds to the Tribe any 
land held in trust, or interest in land held in trust, which he or she may own 
at the time of such assignment. The amount of such assignment shall be based 
upon a calculation of the amount and quality of the land available for 
assignment, the number of applicants and the dependents in each family, and the 
expectancy of inheriting land.

Section 6.  Allotments Exchanged to Assignments. The Tribal Council may 
make assignments in exchange for allotments in accordance with the terms of a 
Land ordinance.

Section 7.  Leases. Unassigned tribal land may be leased to individual 
members or associations of members of the Tribe for personal, agricultural, 
business and other related uses to be at a price per acre to be determined by 
the Tribal Council in accordance with a tribal land ordinance and for a period 
not exceeding fifteen (15) years. All leases shall be formalized in a written 
lease agreement between the Tribe and the lessee/tribal member. The proceeds 
from such leases shall be deposited in the treasury of the Tribe and used for 
the benefit of the Tribe.

Section 8.  Leases for Housing. Unassigned tribal land may be leased to 
individual members or associations of members of the Tribe for housing purposes 
at a price per acre to be determined by the Tribal Council in accordance with a 
tribal land ordinance and for a period not to exceed up to twenty-five (25) 
years with an option for another twenty-five (25) years. All leases shall be 
formalized in a written lease agreement between the Tribe and the lessee/tribal 
member. A lessee/tribal member shall have two (2) years to inprove and occupy 
such leased land. The proceeds from such leases shall be deposited in the 
treasury of the Tribe and used for the benefit of the Tribe.

Section 9.  Appeals. Appeals from the acts of the Tribal Council in land 
matters, and any other land disputes, may be taken to Tribal Court whose 
decision shall be final and binding upon all parties concerned.

Section 10.  Land Ordinance. The Tribal Council shall have power to 
promulgate ordinances regulating the use, assignment, and inheritance of lands, 
the ownership and disposition of improvements thereon, and all other land 
matters, on all lands within the jurisdiction of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XI - BILL OF RIGHTS

 
 The Tribe, in exercising its powers of self-government shall not:

(1)  make or enforce any law prohibiting the free exercise of religion, or 
abridging the freedom of speech, or of the press, or the right of the 
people peacefully to assemble and to petition for a redress of 
grievances;

(2)  violate the right of the people to be secure in their persons, 
houses, papers and effects against unreasonable searches and 
seizures, nor issue warrants but upon probable cause, supported by 
oath or affirmation, and particularly describing the place to be 
searched and the person or thing to be seized;

(3)  subject any person for the same offense to be twice put in jeopardy;

(4)  compel any person in ary criminal case to be a witness against 

himself;

(5)  take any private property for public use without just compensation;

(6)  deny to any person in a criminal proceeding the right to a speedy 
and public trial, to be informed of the nature and cause of the 
accusation, to be confronted with the witnesses against him, to have 
compulsory process for obtaining witnesses in his favor, and at his 
own expense to have the assistance of counsel for his defense;

(7)  require excessive bail, inpose excessive fines, or inflict cruel and 

unusual punishment;

(8)  deny to any person within its jurisdiction the equal protection of 
its laws or deprive any person of liberty or property without due 
process of law;

(9)  pass any bill of attainder or ex post facto laws; and

(10)  deny any person accused of an offense punishable by imprisonment the 
right, upon request, to a trial by jury of not less than twelve (12) 
persons.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - HUMAN RIGHTS

 
 The Tribe shall provide food, shelter, clothing, and other basic human 
necessities to needy resident tribal members to the fullest extent financially 
feasible.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII - SOVEREIGN IMMUNITY

 
 Section 1. Immunity of Tribe from Suit. The Tribe hereby declares that, 
in exercising self-determination and its sovereign powers to the fullest 
extent, the Tribe is immune from suit except to the extent that the Tribal 
Council expressly waives sovereign ininunity, or as provided by this 
Constitution.

Section 2. Immunity of Tribal Officials and Employees. No tribal 
employee? or Tribal Council member acting within the scope of his or her duties 
or authority is subject to suit.

Section 3. Suit Against the Tribe in Tribal Court. The Tribe, tribal 
officials and employees shall be subject to suit for declaratory and injunctive 
relief in the Tribal Court by persons subject to tribal jurisdiction for the 
purposes of enforcing the rights and duties established by this Constitution or 
other applicable laws.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV - ORDINANCES AND RESOLUTIONS

 
 Section 1.  Ordinances. All final decisions on matters of permanent 
interest shall be embodied in ordinances. Such enactments shall be available 
for inspection by members of the Tribe during normal business hours.

Section 2.  Resolutions. All final decisions on natters of temporary 
interest where a formal expression is needed shall be embodied in a resolution, 
noted in the minutes, and shall be available for inspection by members of the 
Tribe during normal business hours.

Section 3.  Form. All ordinances and resolutions shall be dated and 
numbered, shall cite the appropriate constitutional authority and shall include 
a certificate showing the presence of a quorum and the number of members voting 
in favor of the preposed enactment.

Section 4.  Review. The Tribal Council shall submit Tribal laws and 
enactments to the Secretary of the Interior for his review, comment and 
approval only when required to do so by Federal law.
 
 

ARTICLE XV - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. Requirements. This Constitution may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the Tribe voting at an election called for that 
purpose by the Secretary of the Interior, provided, that at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those entitled to vote shall vote in such election; but no 
amendment shall become effective until approved fay the Secretary of the 
Interior or until deemed approved by the Secretary by operation of law. If the 
voters adept the amendment(s), the Secretary of the Interior shall approve 
such amendment(s) within forty-five (45) days after the election unless the 
amendment(s) are contrary to applicable law; if the Secretary of the Interior 
takes no action within forty-five days, his approval shall be considered as 
given.

Section 2. Requests for a Secretarial Election. It shall be the duty of 
the Secretary of the Interior to call and hold an election on any preposed 
amendment at the request of the Tribal Council, or upon presentation of a 
petition signed by thirty percent (30%) of the qualified voters of the Tribe.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - SAVINGS CLAUSE

 
 All enactments of the Tribe adopted before the effective date of this 
Constitution shall continue in full force and effect to the extent that they 
are consistent with this Constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provision of this Constitution shall in the future be declared 
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, the invalid provision or 
provisions shall be severed and the remaining provisions shall continue in full 
force and effect.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - ADOPTION OF CONSTITUTION

 
 This Constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the registered 
voters of the Tribe of the Round Valley Indian Reservation, California, voting 
at a special election authorized by the Secretary of the Interior in which at 
least thirty percent (30%) of those registered in accordance with Secretarial 
regulations to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the 
Interior for his approval and, if approved by the Secretary of the Interior or 
by operation of law, shall be effective from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTION

 
 Pursuant to a Secretarial election authorized by the Deputy Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs on April 22, 1994, the Constitution of the Round Valley Indian 
Tribes of California was submitted to the qualified voters of the Covelo Indian 
Community of the Round Valley Reservation, and on 5, was 
duly (adopted) by a vote of 98 (number) for, and 45 (number) 
against, and (number) cast ballots found separated or mutilated, in an 
election in which at least thirty percent (30%) of the 223 (number) 
entitled to vote cast their ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended.

Election Board Member

Election Board Member
 
 

CERTIFICATE OF APPROVAL

 
 I, Patrick A. Hayes, Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs, by virtue 

of the authority granted to the Secretary of the Interior by the Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), and delegated to me by 230 D.M. 2.4, do hereby approve 
the Constitution of the Round Valley Indian Tribes. This Constitution is 
effective as of this date; PROVIDED, That nothing in this approval shall be 
construed as authorizing any action under this document that would be contrary 
to Federal law.

Acting Deputy Commissioner of Indian Affairs

Washington, D. C.

Date: Sep 14 1994

