 
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF 
THE PAPAGO TRIBE 
ARIZONA


 
  
  
 APPROVED JANUARY 6, 1937 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1937 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE PAPAGO TRIBE

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Papago Tribe of Sells, Gila Bend, and 
San Xavier Reservations, in the State of Arizona, in order to build 
upon our established laws and customs and form a tribal organiza
tion; to establish justice; to insure tranquillity and liberty; to con
serve our tribal property; to develop our common resources; and to 
promote the best welfare of the present generation and our children 
in education and industry, do ordain and establish this Constitution 
and By-laws.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Papago Council of Sells, Gila Bend, and 
San Xavier Reservation shall extend to the territories within their 
original boundaries as established by Executive Orders as follows: 
Gila Bend, December 12, 1882, modified June 17, 1909; San Xavier, 
July 1, 1874; and Sells Papago Reservation by Executive Order of 
February 1, 1917. and the Act of February 21, 1931, and to such other 
lands as may be added hereafter, either by purchase from tribal 
funds, or under any law of the United States.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Papago Tribe shall consist of 

the following:

(a)  All Indians whose names appear on the official census roll of 
the Papago Tribe as of January 1, 1936, and all children of resident 
members, provided that within two years from the adoption and ap
proval of this Constitution and By-laws, additions and changes may 
be made by the Papago Council, subject to the approval of the Secre
tary of the Interior.

(b)  The Council shall have power to adopt all children born out
side of the reservations, who are the offspring of members, and are 
one-half or more Indian blood.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Papago Tribe shall consist 

of a council known as the Papago Council.

Sec. 2. Two representatives to the Papago Council shall be selected 
from each of the 11 districts of the reservations, and in such manner 
as each district shall determine for itself.

Sec. 3. The first meeting of the Papago Council shall be called 
within thirty days after the adoption and approval of this constitution

and each district shall be given at least fifteen days’ notice of 
such first meeting in order that it may elect its representatives. The 
Chairman and Secretary of the Constitutional Committee, acting 
with the Superintendent of the Agency, shall issue the call for the 
first meeting and supervise its assembly, but the Papago Council 
itself shall be the sole judge of the certification of its members.

Sec. 4. The Council at its first meeting shall elect from within or 
without its own membership, a Chairman, a Vice-Chairman, Secre
tary, and Treasurer and such other officers as may be advisable, to 
serve for one year each.

Sec. 5. The tenure of each member of the Papago Council shall 
be two years, or until recalled by the district which selected him 
and until replaced by another selected by the District Council to 
fill his place.

Article IV—District Organization

Section 1. For the purpose of representation and administration 
there shall be 11 districts, including among them as two such districts, 
the Gila Bend and San Xavier Reservations. The Council shall 
have the power to change the territory of said districts.

Sec. 2. Each district shall govern itself in local matters in ac
cordance with its old customs and such changes as may from time 
to time appear desirable and expedient, except that each district 
shall elect a District Council of not less than five members, one of 
whom shall act as headman or chairman.

Sec. 3. Each district shall manage its own local affairs, but any 
matters involving more than one district shall be decided by the 
Papago Council.

Sec. 4. If a vacancy occurs in the Council it shall be filled by the 

District Council from which the vacancy occurred.

Article V—Powers of the Papago Council

Section 1. The Papago Council, subject to the guarantees con
tained in Article VI of this Constitution, reserves the right and is 
hereby confirmed in the right to use its old laws and customs in 
its religious ceremonials, in its social life, and in its local self
government. This includes the manner of selecting headmen and 
councils and of deciding matters affecting the welfare of individuals 
and the communities.

Sec. 2. Powers not subject to review by the Secretary of the 

Interior :

The Council shall have the power:
(a)  To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local governments 

and corporations on behalf of the tribe.

(b)  To employ legal counsel, the choice of counsel and the fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(c)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease, or incumbrance of 
tribal lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets without the 
consent of the tribe, or the grant or relinquishment of any rights 
to the use of mineral rights or other natural or fiscal assets of the 
Papago Indians.

(d)  To advise with the Secretary of the Interior and Congress 
as to its desires and wishes on all appropriation estimates and 
federal projects for the three Papago Reservations and for the 
benefit of the Papago Tribe, and as to monies spent for such 
purposes.

(e)  To appoint subordinate boards and officers and to prescribe 

their duties and powers.

(f) To regulate its own procedures.
(g)  To require members to contribute labor for public works in 

their own communities only.

to provide for public welfare.

(h)  To protect the public health and morals of the Tribe, and 

(i)  To regulate domestic relations of members of the Tribe.
(j)  To require members temporarily living away from the three 
Papago Reservations to share in the expense of any public works 
or community improvements in their own districts.

(k)  To cooperate with the Commissioner of Indian Affairs and 
his officials in maintaining the best schools possible for the Papagos.
(l)  To cultivate and preserve native arts, crafts, and culture.
(m)  To pass ordinances necessary or incidental to the exercise of 

any of the foregoing powers.

Sec. 3. Powers subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.
The Council shall have the power:
(a)  To have the control of all tribal funds which are not under 
the control of Congress; to provide for the manner of all loans to 
individuals or cooperatives; to appropriate money out of available 
tribal funds for salaries of tribal officials and for other expenses 
of public business, and to recommend the appropriation of tribal 
funds and other funds within the control of Congress or of the 
Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  To provide for the maintenance of law and order and the 
administration of justice by establishing a tribal court or courts 
and a police force, and defining the powers and duties of such 
courts and police.

(c)  To remove or exclude from any of the three Papago Reserva
tions non-members who occupy reservation land without lawful 
authority and whose presence may be injurious to the peace, hap
piness or welfare of the members of the Tribe.

(d)  To promulgate ordinances covering the assignment of tribal 
land and the leasing of tribal land in conformity with departmental 
regulations for the protection of Indian ranges pursuant to section 6 
of the Act of June 18, 1934.

(e)  To regulate and license non-members doing business upon res
ervation lands, and to issue permits for hunting, fishing and trap
ping upon such lands.

(f) To make recommendations to the Superintendent, the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, or the Secretary of the Interior, con
cerning the appointment and removal of employees assigned to 
duties on the Papago Reservations.

(g)  To charter subordinate organizations and to supervise their 

activities under ordinances regularly passed and approved.

(h)  To manage the economic affairs of the Tribe, tribal lands, and 
property, provided that this power may be exercised without review 
by the Secretary of the Interior in cases specifically authorized by 
this Constitution or by a Corporate Charter which may be issued 
to the Tribe by the Secret ary of the Interior.

(i) To promulgate and enforce ordinances regulating the estab
lishment and maintenance of airports on the Reservations, and to 
regulate traffic on the highways of the Papago Reservations in the 
interest of the safety, peace and welfare of the people.

(j)  To provide by ordinance for the inheritance of personal prop
erty and assignments as nearly as possible in conformity with estab
lished customs.

(k)  To regulate the use and disposition of the property of mem
bers of the Papago Tribe insofar as such use and disposition affects 
the welfare of the Tribe at large.

Sec. 4. The Papago Council may exercise such further powers 
as may in the future be delegated to the Tribe by the Secretary of the 
Interior, or by any other duly authorized official or agency of 
government.

Sec. 5. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Papago 
Tribe, but not expressly referred to in this Constitution, shall not 
be abridged by this Article, but may be exercised by the members 
of the Papago Tribe through the adoption of appropriate By-laws 
and constitutional amendments.

Sec. 6. Any resolution or ordinance which by the terms of this 
Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Papago Reservations 
who shall within ten days thereafter approve or disapprove the same.
If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or resolution, 
5t shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall 
transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the Secre
tary of the Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of the 
enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for any cause, by 
notifying the Papago Council of his veto.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him, within ten days after its enactment, he 
shall advise the Papago Council of his reasons therefor. If these 
reasons appear to the Council insufficient, it may, by a majority 
vote, refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may. within 90 days from the date of its enactment, approve the 
same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or resolution shall 
become effective.

Article VI—Rights of Members

Section 1. All members of the Papago Tribe shall have the free

dom of worship, speech, press, and assembly.

Sec. 2. All members of the Papago Tribe shall be given equal 
opportunity to participate in the economic resources and activities of 
the Papago Reservations.

Article VII—Appointment of Judges and Police

Judges and police of the tribal court or courts may be elected by 
a vote of the people, each for a term of two years. When any one 
of them is guilty of any felony or misdemeanor, he may be subject to 
recall. When so elected, salaries for these officers may be continued 
to be paid from government appropriations.

Article VIII—Lands

Section 1. The unallotted lands of the Papago Reservations, and 
all lands which may be acquired in the future by or for the Papago 
people, shall be held as tribal lands forever.

Sec. 2. All allotted lands, including heirship lands, within the 
Papago Reservations, shall continue to be held by their present 
owners under existing laws, as well as the improvements thereon. 
It is further recognized that no owner of allotted land shall be com
pelled to relinquish his land except for public purposes of the Tribe, 
and in such cases the land owner shall receive just and fair compensa
tion for the land relinquished.

Sec. 3. Tribal lands may be assigned to members of the Papago 

Tribe in accordance with the following provisions:

(a) The assignment of land for beneficial use and occupancy shall 
be made by the District Councils under their customary regulations, 
or in accordance with ordinances passed by the Papago Council and 
approved by the district.

(b)  Every member of the San Xavier District Community who is 
the head of a family that does not own any land under allotment, or 
who agrees to surrender to the district all such land, including in
terests in land in heirship status, shall be entitled to receive an 
assignment of new land if such is available.

(c)  Any member of the Papago Tribe who owns an allotment of 
land or any share in heirship land or any deeded land, may, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily transfer his 
interests in such land to the tribe and receive therefor an assignment 
to the same land or to land of equal value.

Sec. 4. Tribal lands which are not assigned may be used for com
munal pastures or gardens by the various districts or for public 
purposes of any sort. Such lands may also be leased by the Dis
trict Community and one-half of the proceeds of such leases shall 
accrue to the Papago Council and one-half to the District Council: 
Provided. That all leases to non-members and leases to members in 
excess of a reasonable acreage as determined by the Council shall be 
subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

Sec. 5. Inasmuch as the land is held in common by the Papago 
Tribe, it is provided that the district fences now being constructed 
by the Government shall not hold any Papago from going into 
another district to farm, just as he has for many years past. Should 
it be found in time to come that these fences become a detriment to 
the livestock industry and progress, parts of them may be removed as 
may be determined by agreement of the District Councils concerned.
Sec. 6. All individual developments on the reservation lands such 
as water developments, farms, and homes shall be held as personal

property. Personal property and property obtained or built up by 
an individual shall be subject to his disposal in accordance with the 
customs of the district in which he lives.

Sec. 7. The right to continued use and occupancy of buildings and 
grounds for religious and educational purposes, which were in use 
for said purposes by any church or missionary organization on Jan
uary 1, 1936. is hereby confirmed: Provided, That said buildings and 
grounds shall, in the discretion of the Papago Council, revert to the 
Papago Tribe when no longer used for such religious or educational 
purposes by the church or missionary organization in possession on 
January 1, 1936.

Article IX—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority 
vote of the Papago Council, and may be ratified in the same manner 
as this Constitution and By-laws.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE PAPAGO TRIBE

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman of the Papago Council shall preside at 
all meetings of the Council, shall perform all duties pf a chairman 
and exercise any authority delegated to him by the Papago Council. 
He shall vote only in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. The Vice-Chairman of the Papago Council shall assist 
the Chairman when requested to do so, and in the absence of the 
Chairman, he shall preside and assume all the duties of the Chairman.
Sec. 3. The Secretary of the Papago Council shall keep the min
utes of all regular and special meetings, conduct all tribal corre
spondence and keep an accurate record of all business transacted. It 
shall be his duty to submit copies of all minutes of regular and 
special meetings of the Papago Council to the Superintendent of the 
Agency and to the Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Sec. 4. (a) The Treasurer of the Papago Council shall accept, re
ceipt for, keep, and safeguard all funds in the custody of the Papago 
Council, whether same be tribal funds or special funds for which the 
Papago Council is acting as trustee or custodian. He shall deposit 
all such funds as directed by the Papago Council and shall make 
and preserve a faithful record of such funds and shall report on all 
receipts and expenditures and the amount and nature of all funds 
in his possession or custody, to the Council at regular and special 
meetings and at such other times as requested by the Papago Council, 
his reports to be in writing and matters of record. He shall not 
pay or otherwise disburse any funds in the possession or custody of 
the Council except when properly authorized to do so by resolution 
duly passed by the Papago Council.

(b)  The books and records of the Treasurer shall be audited at 
least once a year by a competent auditor employed by the Papago 
Council, and at such other times as the Council or the Commissioner 
of Indian Affairs may direct.

(c)  The Treasurer shall be required to give a surety bond satis
factory to the Papago Council and the Commissioner of Indian 
Affairs.

(d)  The Treasurer shall be present at all regular and special 

meetings of the Council.

(e)  All checks shall be signed by the Treasurer and shall be 
countersigned by the Chairman of the Papago Council, and all 
checks issued shall be approved by the Superintendent of the Papago 
Reservations until such time as may be determined pursuant to a 
Corporate Charter to be issued to the Papago Tribe, after which 
such approval by the Superintendent will not be required.

Article II—Meetings

Section 1. Regular meetings of the Papago Council shall be held 
at 1:00 o’clock p. m. on the first Saturday of each month at the Sells 
Agency in a designated hall or building where official records may 
be kept. Special meetings may be called by a written notice of the 
Chairman or by a majority of the Papago Council, who shall notify 
all members at least twenty-four hours before convening the meeting.
Sec. 2. No business shall be transacted by the Papago Council 
unless a quorum is present. A quorum shall consist of a majority 
of the members.

Article III—Adoption

This Constitution and By-Laws, when ratified by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Papago Tribe, voting at a special elec
tion called for the purpose by the Secretary of the Interior at which 
at least thirty percent of those entitled to vote shall vote, shall be 
submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, and if approved, shall be 
effective from the time of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 12, 1936, by the Secre
tary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the adult Indians of the Papago Tribe 
of Sells, Gila Bend, and San Xavier Reservations, Arizona, and was 
on December 12, 1936, duly ratified by a vote of 1,340 for, and 580 
against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those entitled 
to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by 
the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 Stat. 378).

Jose X. Pablo, 

Chairman of Election Board.

Juan Harvey, 

Secretary of Election Board.

Theodore B. Hall, Superintendent.

I, Harold L. Ickes, the Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
act of June 18, 1934 (49 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Papago Tribe of Sells, 
Gila Bend, and San Xavier Reservations, Arizona.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 

be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
or By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to those Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

Approval recommended December 24, 1936.

John Collier, 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Harold L. Ickes, 
Secretary of the Interior.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., January 6, 1937.

