 
  
 TOHONO O’ODHAM CODE 
 

CONSTITUTION

 
 Constitution of the Tohono O’odham Nation

CONSTITUTION OF THE TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION

History: The Constitution of the Tohono O’odham Nation was adopted on January 18, 1986 in 
an election in which at least 30% of the Nation’s qualified voters cast their ballots in accordance 
with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, 
and was approved by the Acting Deputy Assistant Secretary for Indian Affairs, and became 
effective, on March 6, 1986.

Related History: The Constitution and By-laws of the Papago Tribe were ratified by the adult 
Indians of the Papago Tribe on December 12, 1936 in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian 
Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended, and were approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior and became effective on June 18, 1937. The Constitution and By-laws 
of the Papago Tribe, as amended, were repealed and superceded by the Constitution of the 
Tohono O’odham Nation effective March 6, 1986.

CONSTITUTION OF THE TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
 
 

TABLE OF CONTENTS

 
 Preamble......................................................................................1

Article I 

Jurisdiction..................................................................................1

Article II 

Membership................................................................................1

Article III 

Rights of Members..................................................................... 2

Article IV 

Form of Government.................................................................. 2

Article V 

Legislative Branch..................................................................... 2

Article VI 

Powers of the Tohono  O’odham Council....................................3

Article VII 

Executive Branch........................................................................7

Article VIII 

Judicial Branch............................................................................8

Article IX 

District Council Organization.................................................... 9

Article X 

Elections......................................................................................10

Article XI 

Tenure of Office..........................................................................11

Article XII 

Absences and Vacancies.............................................................11

Article XIII  Removal and Recall....................................................................12

Artic le XIV  Referendum.................................................................................13

Article XV 

Initiative......................................................................................13

Article XVI  Land Policy.................................................................................14

Article XVII  Water Policy................................................................................15

Article XVIII  Environmental Policy..................................................................16

Article XIX 

Supremacy of Constitution......................................................... 17

Article XX 

Severability................................................................................. 17

Article XXI  Repeal.........................................................................................17

Article XXII  Amendments...............................................................................17

Article XXIII  Adoption.....................................................................................17

Article XXIV  Certificate of Results of Elections..............................................18

Article XXV  Approval.....................................................................................18

CONSTITUTION OF THE TOHONO O’ODHAM NATION
 
 

PREAMBLE

 
 We, the members of the Tohono O’odham Nation, formerly known as the Papago 
Tribe, do ordain and establish this constitution for the people of this nation, 
in order to affirm our sovereign powers of self-government, to preserve, protect 
and build upon our unique and distinctive culture and traditions, to conserve our 
common resources, to establish a responsive form of government, to provide for 
the free expression of our people, to promote the rights, education and welfare 
of the present and future generations of our people and to show our gratitude to 
I’itoi our Maker. This constitution when duly adopted and approved shall super
sede the Constitution and Bylaws of the Papago Tribe, Arizona, as amended, 
ratified by the adult Indians of the Papago Tribe on December 12, 1936, and 
approved by the Secretary of the Interior on January 6, 1937.
 
 

ARTICLE I - JURISDICTION

 
 Section 1. The sovereign powers, authority and jurisdiction of the 
Tohono O’odham Nation and of its government shall extend to all lands within the 
boundaries of the Tohono O’odham Nation established by Executive Orders: 
December 12, 1382, modified June 17, 1909 (Gila Bend); July 1, 1874 (San Xavier); 
February 1, 1917, the Act of February 21, 1931 (Sells); the Act of September 10, 
1978, (Florence); and to such other lands as may have been or may hereafter be 
added thereto by purchase, gift, Act of Congress or otherwise.

Section 2. The sovereign powers, authority and jurisdiction of the 
Tohono O’odham Nation and its government shall extend to all persons and activi
ties carried on within the boundaries of the Tohono O’odham Nation consistent 
with federal law.

Section 3. The sovereign powers, authority and jurisdiction of the 
Tohono O’odham Nation and its government over members of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation shall extend beyond the geographical boundaries of the Tohono O’odham 
Nation.

Section 1. The membership of the Tohono O’odham Nation shall consist of the 
following:
 
 

ARTICLE II - MEMBERSHIP

 
 (a)  All Indians whose names appear on the official census rolls of the 
Sells and Gila Bend Reservations as of January 1 , 1937, and of the 
San Xavier Reservation as of January 1, 1940, provided that addi
tions and changes may be made to said rolls by the Tohono O'odham 
Council, subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  All children born to resident members.

Section 2. The council shall have the power to adopt into membership anyone 
who is one-half (1/2) degree or more of Papago-Tohono O'odham Indian blood.

Section 3. Membership in the Tohono O’odham Nation and all rights deriving 
therefrom shall be lost or relinquished if a person is or becomes enrolled as 
a member in another Indian nation, tribe, community or band, provided such person 
shall first be given an opportunity to relinquish membership in such other nation, 
tribe, community or band.
 
 

ARTICLE III  - RIGHTS OF MEMBERS

 
 Section 1. All political power is inherent in the people. The government 
of the Tohono O'odham Nation derives its powers from the consent of the 
governed and is established to protect and maintain their individual rights. It 
shall not deny to any member of the Tohono O'odham Nation the equal protection 
of its laws or deprive any member of liberty or property without due process of 
law.

Section 2. All members of the Tohono O’odham Nation shall have the 
freedom of worship, speech, press and assembly.

Section 3. All members of the Tohono O'odham Nation shall be given equal 
opportunity to participate in the economic resources and activities of the 
Tohono O'odham Nation.

Section 4. The listing of the foregoing rights shall not be construed as 
denying or abridging other fundamental rights of the people guaranteed by Title II 
of the Indian Civil Rights Act of April 1, 1963 (82 Stat. 77).
 
 

ARTICLE IV  - FORM OF GOVERNMENT

 
 The government of the Tohono O'odham Nation shall be composed of three inde
pendent branches: the LEGISLATIVE, consisting of the Tohono O'odham Council; 
the EXECUTIVE, consisting of the office of Chairman of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation; and the JUDICIAL, consisting of the Tohono O'odham Judiciary.
 
 

ARTICLE V  - LEGISLATIVE BRANCH

 
 Section 1. All legislative powers of the Tohono O’odham Nation shall be 
vested in the Tohono O'odham Council, which shall consist of two representatives, 
or their alternates, elected from each of the districts of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation.

Section 2. Each district shall be entitled to as many votes on the
Tohono O'odham Council (divided by ten) as there are members of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation residing in the district. Such votes may be cast by either or both of the 
district representatives, or their alternates, who are present and voting. In 
the event the two representatives of a district, or their alternates, should 

divide their voces, each shall be entitled to vote one-half (1/2) of the votes 
their particular district is entitled to cast. A majority of the voces cast 
shall govern the action of the Tohono O'odham Council.

Section 3. No business shall be transacted by the Tohono O'odham Council 
unless a quorum is present. A quorum shall exist when the representatives, or 
their alternates, present are entitled to cast a majority of the total voces 
which all representatives would be entitled to cast.

Section 4. The Tohono O’Odham Council shall elect from among its own 
membership a chairman and vice-chairman. The chairman, or in his absence, the 
vice-chairman shall preside at all meetings of the council, shall perform all 
duties of a chairman and exercise any authority delegated to him by the council. 
He shall be entitled to cast his voce as the representative of his district on 
any question before the council.

Section 5. The Tohono O'odham Council shall select from outside of its 
own membership a secretary and such other officers as may be necessary. They 
shall serve until replaced by the council.

Section 6. Voting on any law, ordinance or resolution, in all council 
meetings, shall be by roll call vote and each voce shall be recorded by the 
secretary.

ARTICLE VI - POWERS OF THE TOHONO O'ODHAM COUNCIL

Section 1. The Tohono O'odham Council shall have all of the legislative 
powers vested in the Tohono O'odham Nation and shall, in accordance with estab
lished customs of the Tohono O’odham Nation and subject to the express Limita
tions contained in this constitution and the laws of the United States, have the 
power:

(a)  To establish rules and procedures to regulate all meetings of 

the Tohono O’odham Council, standing committees, boards and 
special committees.

(b)  To provide for, appoint, or provide for the appointment of, 

and prescribe the duties and powers of committees, boards, 
officers and agents; to establish and regulate subordinate 
organizations for business purposes; provided that no such 
committee, board, officer, agent or organization shall exercise 
powers of the Tohono O'odham Council unless they are expressly 
delegated by the Tohono O'odham Council.

(c)  To exercise the inherent powers of the Tohono O'odham Nation by 

providing laws, ordinances or resolutions:

(1) 

to govern the conduct of members of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation and other persons within its jurisdiction;

(2) 

(3) 

(4) 

(5) 

(6) 

to promote, protect and provide for public health, peace, 
morals, education and general welfare of the Tohono 
O'odham Nation and its members;

to regulate the domestic affairs of members of the Tohono 
O'odham Nation and to provide for the appointment of 
guardians or custodians for minors and incapacitated 
persons.

to regulate the use and disposition of private prop
erty within its territory insofar as such use and dis
position may affect the welfare of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation at large;

to regulate inheritance of personal property and 
interests in lands other than allotments consistent with 
federal law;

to provide for the maintenance of law and order and the 
administration of justice; to establish Law enforcement 
agencies; to enact criminal and civil laws governing the 
conduct of any person within the Tohono O'odham Nation 
consistent with federal law;

(7)  to provide for removal or exclusion from the Tohono O'odham 

Nation of non-members whose presence nay be injurious to 
the peace, health or welfare of the Tohono O'odham;

(8) 

to preserve and cultivate native arts, crafts and 
traditions.

(d)  To exercise the following fiscal powers:

(1) 

(2) 

to prevent the use, disposition or encumbrance of fiscal 
assets of the Tohono O'odham Nation.

to manage any funds within the exclusive control of the 
Tohono O'odham Nation, including proceeds derived from 
lands and resources of the Tohono O'odham Nation, and to 
appropriate these funds for the benefit of the nation and 
its members. All expenditures of these funds shall be 
pursuant to appropriations or budgets authorised under 
resolutions or in accordance with ordinances or the 
Tohono O'odham Council, and the amounts so expended shall 
be a matter of public record to members or the nation and 
authorized persons at all reasonable times.

(3) 

to adopt, approve and amend annual budgets and to 
authorize the expenditure of funds in accordance with 
these budgets;

(4)

(5) 

(6) 

to levy duties, fees, taxes and assessments on any 
person, corporation or association residing or doing 
business within, the Tohono O'odham Nation; and for such 
purposes to establish assessment, tax, fee or duty 
districts or zones;

to borrow money for public purposes and to secure the 
repayment thereof;

to issue revenue bonds payable solely from lease, rental 
or purchase price installments to finance the cost of 
acquiring, constructing, reconstructing and improving 
industrial, manufacturing, commercial and residential 
facilities, including pollution control facilities, 
utilities and other appurtenances thereto, for lease or 
sale, all for the purpose of stimulating industrial, manu
facturing, commercial and residential development within 
the boundaries of the Tohono O’odham Nation.

(e) 

To authorize, charter and regulate public or private corpora
tions and associations whether organized for profit, or for 
non-profit or charitable purposes.

(f)  To consult, negotiate and conclude agreements and contracts on 

behalf of the Tohono O'odham Nation with Federal, State and 
local governments and other Indian tribes or their departments, 
agencies, or political subdivisions, or with private persons or 
organizations on all matters within the authority of the 
Tohono O'odham Council.

(g)  To enact laws and ordinances for conducting and regulating 

elections.

(h)  To enact laws and ordinances governing the enrollment and 

adaption of members and the relinquishment and loss of member
ship consistent with Article II of this constitution.

(i)  To administer land and other public property, and by law, 

ordinance or resolution:

(1) 

to prevent the sale, disposition, lease, use or encum
brance of Tohono O'odham national lands, interests in 
lands, rights-of-way, or other public resources when 
such sale, disposition, lease, use or encumbrance will, 
in the opinion of the Tohono O'odham Council, be 
injurious co the best interests of the Tohono O'odhaa 
Nation as a whole;

(2) 

to manage, protect, preserve and regulate the use of the 
property, wildlife, land, air and natural resources 
(including surface and ground waters) of the Tohono 
O’odham Nation;

(3) 

to purchase or otherwise acquire property;

(4) 

to acquire property for public purposes by power of eminent 
domain, consistent with federal law, paying just compen
sation therefor;

(5) 

to transfer or convey assets to the Tohono O’odham 
Nation.

(j)  To consult with the Congress of the United States and appro

priate federal agencies regarding federal activities that 
affect the Tohono O’odham Nation and all federal appropriation 
estimates and projects for the benefit of the Tohono O’odham 
Nation before such estimates and projects are submitted to 
Congress and other federal agencies;

(k)  To advise and make recommendations to the Secretary of the 

Interior concerning the appointment or removal of federal 
employees assigned to duties with the Tohono O’odham Nation;

(1) 

To enact laws, ordinances and resolutions necessary or 

 incidental to the exercise of its legislative powers.

Section 2. In addition to the foregoing powers, the Tohono O’odham Council 
shall, in accordance with the established customs of the Tohono O’odham Nation 
and subject to the express limitations contained in this constitution or 
applicable federal law, have the following powers, which powers shall be 
subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior or his authorized 
representative, but only co the extent and for so long as such approval is 
expressly required by federal statutes:

(a)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement of 

the rights of the Tohono O’odham Nation; the choice of counsel 
and the fixing of fees are subject to approval by the Secretary 
of the Interior so long as such approval is required by 
federal law.

(b)  To manage and make expenditures for national purposes from any 

funds which are held in trust by the Federal Government and 
which, by appropriation of Congress or otherwise, have become 
available for use by the Tohono O’odham Nation.

(c)  To make and enforce laws and ordinances covering the right of 

the Tohono O’odham Nation to levy taxes and license fees on 
traders licensed by the Bureau of Indian Affairs.

(d)  To manage and lease or otherwise deal with lands, or inter

ests in land, and resources of the Tohono O’odham Nation, 
including the usa, permit or lease of lands for mining pur
poses (including oil and gas), and the use, permit, lease, 
sale or disposition of other resources (including surface 
and ground waters).

Section 3. The Tohono O’odham Council may exercise such further
powers as may in the future be delegated to the Tohono O’odham Nation by the 
Secretary of the Interior, or by any other duly authorized official or 
agency of the United States Government.
 
 

ARTICLE VII - EXECUTIVE BRANCH

 
 Section 1. The executive power of the Tohono O’odham Nation shall 
be vested in the office of the Chairman of the Tohono O’odham Nation. The 
chairman together with the vice chairman shall be elected at large by a 
majority of votes cast by all qualified voters for a term of four years.

Section 2. The chairman shall be the chief executive officer of the 
Tohono O’odham Nation and shall exercise the following powers, subject to all 
express limitations contained in this constitution:

(a)  To oversee the administration and management of the govern

ment in accordance with an administrative plan adopted by 
the Tohono O’odham Council.

(b)  To have veto power over enactments of the Tohono O’odham 

Council as provided in section 5 of this article.

(c)  To oversee the implementation of all laws, ordinances, resolu

tions and rules made by the Tohono O’odham Council.

(d)  To exercise all other powers delegated to him by the Tohono 

O’odham Council.

(e)  With the approval of the Tohono O’odham Council, to appoint 

the treasurer, and other officers and heads of all govern
mental departments, who shall serve until replaced at the 
request of the chairman.

(f)  To act as the official representative of the Tohono O’odham 

Nation.

(g)  To communicate to the Tohono O’odham Council the condition of 

the Tohono O’odham Nation and recommend such matters as he 
shall deem expedient.

(h)  To call the Tohono O’odham Council into special session.

Section 3. 
The vice chairman shall assist the chairman when requested to do 
so, and in the absence of the chairman, shall have the powers and be subject to 
the responsibilities of the chairman.

Section 4. 
a compensation to be established by the Tohono O'odham Council, which shall not 
be diminished during their continuance in office.

The chairman and vice chairman shall receive for their services 

Every law, ordinance, resolution or separate appropriation item 

Section 5. 
passed by the Tohono O'odham Council shall be presented to the chairman for his 
approval before it becomes effective. If he approves, he shall sign it. But if 
he disapproves, he shall return it to the Tohono O'odham Council within 
forty-eight (48) hours, with his objections. If after consideration, it again 
passes the council by a majority of two-thirds (2/3) of the votes cast, it shall 
become law and he shall sign it notwithstanding his objections.
 
 

ARTICLE VIII - JUDICIAL BRANCH

 
 Section 1. The judicial power of the Tohono O'odham Nation shall be vested in 
the Tohono O'odham Judiciary, which shall consist of the Tohono O'odham Courts 
and such inferior courts as the Tohono O'odham Council may from time to time 
ordain and establish.

Section 2. The judical power Of the Tohono O'odham Judiciary shall extend to 
all cases and matters in law and equity arising under this constitution, the laws 
and ordinances of or applicable to the Tohono O'odham Nation, and the customs of 
the Tohono O'odham Nation.

Section 3. The Tohono O'odham Courts shall be courts of record and shall 
consist of at least six (6) judges appointed by the Tohono O'odham Council. 
The courts shall be open for the transaction of business, except on non-judicial 
days. In the determination of causes, all decisions of the courts shall be in 
writing, and the grounds of the decision shall be stated.

Section 4. Within sixty (60) days after the effective date of this 
constitution, the Tohono O'odham Council shall appoint at least six (6) judges 
of the Tonono O'odham Courts, as follows: Two (2) judges for terms of two (2) 
years, two (2) for terms of four (4) years, and two (2) for terms of six (6) 
years. Thereafter their terms shall be six (6) years and staggered so that 
approximately one-third (1/3) of the judges shall be appointed every other 
year.

Section 5. The judges of the Tohono O'odham Courts shall select a chief 
judge from among their number, who shall be the chief administrative officer 
of the Tohono O'odham Judiciary and shall serve in that capacity for a term of 
two (2) years.

The chief judge shall each year designate one or more of the 

Section 6. 
judges of the Tohono O'odham Courts as judge(s) of the children’s court, who 
shall preside over the children’s court, a division of the Tohono O’odham 
Courts.

Section 7. The appellate power of the Tohono O’odham Nation shall be vested 
in the court of appeals, which shall have jurisdiction to hear all appeals from 
the Tohono O’odham Courts. Decisions of the court of appeals on all matters 
within its appellate jurisdiction shall be final.

Section 8. The court of appeals shall consist of three (3) judges of the 
Tohono O’odham Courts designated by the chief judge, none of whom shall have 
presided at the trial of the case appealed. 

.

The judges of the Tohono O’odham Courts shall receive for their 
Section 9. 
services a compensation to be established by the Tohono O’odham Council, which 
shall not be diminished during their continuance in office.

Section 10. 

The Tohono O’odham Judiciary shall have the power to;

(a) 

Interpret, construe and apply the laws of, or applicable to, 
the Tohono O’odham Nation.

(b)  Declare the laws of the Tohono O’odham Nation void if such 

laws are net in agreement with this constitution.

(c) 

Issue injunctions, attachments, writs of mandamus, 
quo warranto, review, certiorari and prohibition, and writs 
of habeas corpus to any part of the Tohono O’odham Nation 
upon petition by, or on behalf of, any person held in actual 
custody.

(d)  Establish court procedures for the Tohono O’odham Judiciary.
 
 

ARTICLE IX  - DISTRICT COUNCIL ORGANIZATION

 
 Section 1. The Tohono O’odham Nation consists of eleven (11) districts: 
 
 
BABCQUIVARI, CHUKUT KUK, GU ACHI, GU VO, HICKIWAN, PISINEMO, SCHUK TOAK, 
 
 SAN XAVIER, SAN LUCY (Gila Bend), SELLS and SIF OIDAK.

Section 2. The Tohono O’odham Council may by ordinance change the foregoing 
number and boundaries of districts.

Section 3. Each district shall have a governing body known as the district 
council, which shall consist of at least five (5) representatives, or their 
alternates, elected either from the district at large, or from communities 
consisting of villages or groups of villages within the district and recognized 
or established as separate voting constituencies pursuant to an ordinance of the 
Tohono O’odham Council, and of a chairman and vice chairman elected from the 
district at large.

Section 4. Each district council shall select from within or without its own 
elected membership a secretary and treasurer who shall serve until replaced by 
the district council.

Section 5. Each district shall govern itself in matters of local concern, 
except that in any matter involving more than one district in which there is a 
dispute, the Tohono O’odham Council shall decide the matter.

Section 6. Each district council shall submit copies of its minutes to the 
office of the secretary of the Tohono O'odham Council within ten (10) days after 
formal approval thereof.

Section 7. No district council shall expend district funds except pursuant to 
budgets authorized under resolutions of the district council and approved by the 
Tohono O'odham Council. The management of these funds shall be only by a 
treasurer or other authorized officer of the district council who has furnished 
a surety bond satisfactory to the treasurer of the Tohono O'odham Nation, and all 
expenditures of these funds shall be by checks signed by such treasurer or other 
authorized officer and the chairman or vice chairman of the district council.
 
 

ARTICLE X 

- ELECTIONS

 
 Section 1. All members of the Tohono O'odham Nation who have reached the age 
of eighteen (18) years prior to the election date shall have the right to vote, 
provided they comply with any and all ordinances regulating elections authorized 
by this constitution.

Section 2. General elections shall be held every other year at a date set Ln 
an election ordinance to be enacted by the Tohono O'odham Council, provided, 
however, that the council is authorized to extend on a one-time basis the terms 
of office of its members to permit tribal elections to coincide with federal 
elections.

Section 3. No person holding an elective public office of the Tohono
O'odham Nation shall hold any other elective office of the Tohono O'odham Nation.

Section 4. A candidate for the office of chairman of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation or of chairman of the district council must, at least sixty (60) days 
prior to the general election, file a declaration of candidacy which shall 
contain the name of the candidate he has selected to run with him for the 
office of vice chairman, and shall bear the signatures of both candidates 
and the signatures of one hundred (100) or more registered voters if the 
declaration of candidacy is for the office of chairman of the Tohono O'odham 
Nation, or of twenty-five (25) or more registered voters if the declaration 
of candidacy is for the office of chairman of. the district council.

Section 5. If there are more than two (2) sets of candidates for the 
offices of chairman and vice chairman of the Tohono O'odham Nation or of 
chairman and vice chairman of the district council, there shall be a primary 
election for such offices and the two (2) sets of candidates receiving the 
greatest number of votes shall stand for election in the general election.

Section 6. The candidates for the offices of representative or alternate 
to the Tohono O’odham Council or the district council receiving the greatest 
number of votes from their respective constituencies shall be elected 
representatives to such council and the candidates receiving the next greatest 
number of votes shall be elected as alternates.

Section 7. The Tohono O’odham Council shall enact an election ordinance 
which shall prescribe rules for the apportionment of representatives to each 
district council when elections of such representatives are from communities 
within the district and not from the district at large, and for the setting 
and holding of primary elections for the offices of chairman and vice chairman 
of the Tohono O’odham Council and of the district council, and which shall 
prescribe the qualifications of candidates, the registration requirements for 
voting and such other rules and procedures necessary to the orderly conduct of 
elections, including but not limited to procedures for validation of petitions 
and the settlement of any and all election disputes. The decision of the Tohono 
O’odham Council in all election matters, including the eligibility and 
qualifications of candidates, shall be final.
 
 

ARTICLE XI -TENURE OF OFFICE

 
 Section 1. The terms of office of all elected officers of the Tohono O’odham 
Nation shall be four (4) years, unless extended by the Tohono O’odham Council for 
the necessary time to cover a postponed election as provided in Section 2 of 
Article X, and they shall hold their offices until their successors have been 
certified and seated.

Section 2. The terms of office of representatives and alternates to the 
Tohono O’odham Council and the district council shall be staggered so that half 
or approximately half their seats shall be open for election at each biennial 
election.

Section 3. Upon adoption of this constitution, the chairman and vice chairman 
of the Papago Council shall assume the offices of chairman and vice chairman of 
the Tohono O’odham Nation, and all other elected public officers of the Tohono 
O’odham Nation shall- continue in office for the remainder of their respective 
terms.
 
 

ARTICLE XII - ABSENCES AND VACANCIES

 
 Section 1. If a representative to the Tohono O’odham Council or the 
district council is unable to attend a meeting, the alternate of the 
representative shall attend.

Section 2. If a vacancy should occur in the office of an elected public 
officer of the Tohono O’odham Nation by reason of death, resignation or legal 
incapacity, the office shall be filled as follows:

(a) 

(b) 

(c) 

(d) 

(e) 

If the vacancy is in the office of the chairman of the Tohono 
O’odham Nation, the vice chairman shall immediately succeed 
to the office of the chairman and the vice chairman’s office 
shall be vacant.

If the vacancy is in the offices of both the chairman and the 
vice chairman of the Tohono O'odham Nation, the chairman of the 
Tohono O'odham Council shall act as temporary chairman of the 
Tohono O'odham Nation and shall, within ten (10) days of the 
vacancy, call a special meeting of the Tohono O'odham Council 
to appoint a chairman and vice chairman from within the Tohono 
O’odham Nation who shall hold their offices for the unexpired 
terms of their predecessors.

If the vacancy is in the office of a representative to the 
Tohono O'odham Council or the district council, the alternate of 
that representative shall immediately succeed to the office of 
the representative and the council of the district or of the 
community from which they are elected shall appoint an alternate 
who shall hold office for the unexpired term of his or her 
predecessor.

If the vacancy is in the office of the chairman of the district 
council, the vice chairman shall immediately succeed to the 
office of chairman and the vice chairman's office shall be 
vacant.

If the vacancy is in the offices of both the chairman and 
vice chairman of the district council, the secretary of the 
district council shall act as temporary chairman and shall, 
within ten (10) days of the vacancy, call a special meeting of 
the district council to appoint a chairman and vice chairman 
within the district who shall hold their offices for the 
unexpired terms of their predecessors.
 
 

ARTICLE XIII  - REMOVAL AND RECALL

 
 Section 1. Any representative of the Tohono O'odham Council, elected officer, 
or judge of the Tohono O'odham Nation who, during the term for which he is 
elected or appointed, is convicted of any felony or crime involving dishonesty, 
in any court of competent jurisdiction, shall automatically forfeit his office 
effective on the date of his initial conviction in court. Any representative of 
the Tohono O'odham Council, elected officer or judge of the Tohono O'odham Nation 
found guilty of a misdemeanor involving moral turpitude, gross neglect of duty, 
malfeasance in office, or misconduct reflecting on the dignity and integrity of 
the tribal government shall be removed from office by majority vote of the 
Tohono O’odham Council. Before any vote for removal is taken, the representa
tive, officer or judge shall be given a written statement of the charges against 
him or her at least ten (10) days before the meeting of the council called to 
consider the removal action.

The accused representative, officer or judge shall be given an opportunity to 
answer any and all charges at the designated council meeting. No representative 
or officer shall preside over the meeting at which his removal is being 
considered. The decision of the Tohono O'odham Council shall be final.

Section 2. The eligible voters of the Tohono O'odham Nation shall have the 
right to recall any representative, or elected officer by filing a petition with 
the secretary of the Tohono O'odham Council signed by at least thirty percent (30%) 
of the eligible voters. Upon receipt of a valid petition, it shall be the duty 
of the Tohono O'odham Council to call a special election within forty (40) days 
of the receipt of the petition upon the question of recall of any representative 
or officer named in the petition. No representative or elected officer may be 
recalled unless a majority of the eligible voters vote in favor of the recall 
and unless at least thirty percent (30%) of the eligible voters vote in the 
election.

Section 3. The Tohono O'odham Council shall enact such ordinances as are 
necessary to implement removal and recall elections consistent with this 
article. The ordinance shall also prescribe when an office subject to 
removal or recall has been vacated and who shall fill such office consistent 
with Article XII.
 
 

ARTICLE XIV  - REFERENDUM

 
 The Tohono O'odham Council shall, either at the direction of the Council itself, 
or upon receipt of a petition signed by not less than three hundred registered 
voters of the Tohono O'odham Nation, submit any enacted or proposed ordinance, 
resolution or other national legislation to a referendum of the registered 
voters. The council shall call a referendum within ninety (90) days from the 
date of the receipt of a valid petition, and shall prescribe the manner in 
which it is to be conducted. The decision of a majority of the voters voting 
in a referendum shall be binding on the council.
 
 

ARTICLE XV  - INITIATIVE

 
 The members of the Tohono O'odham Nation reserve the power to independently 
propose ordinances, resolutions or other legislation affecting the Tohono 
O'odham Nation. Any proposed initiative measure shall be presented to the 
council accompanied by a petition signed by not less than three hundred (300) 
registered voters of the Tohono O'odham Nation. Upon receipt of the petition, 
the council shall either adopt the initiative measure by a majority vote without 
alteration, or call a special election for the purpose of allowing the members of 
the Tohono O'odham Nation to vote on the initiative measure. The election shall 
be held within ninety (90) days from the date a valid petition is presented and 
shall be conducted in the manner prescribed by the council. The decision of a 
majority of the voters in such an election shall be binding on the council.
 
 

ARTICLE XVI - LAND POLICY

 
 Section I. The unallotted lands of the Tohono O'odham Nation and all lands 
hereafter acquired by the nation, or held for the use of the nation or its 
members, are a valuable public resource and shall be held as national lands 
forever. Control and management thereof are vested in the Tohono O'odham 
Council, which may enact laws governing the use, assignment, permit, lease 
or other disposition of lands, interests in land and resources of the nation 
consistent with. Federal law.

Section 2. All allotted lands, including heirship lands, and all 
improvements thereon shall continue to be held by their present owners under 
existing laws.

Section 3. Inasmuch as the lands of the Tohono O'odham Nation are held in 
common, district boundaries shall not prevent any member of the nation from 
going into any district to live or beneficially use the lands in accordance 
with the customary procedures of the district.

Section 4. Lands of the Tohono O'odham Nation may be assigned to members of 
the nation in accordance with the following provisions:

(a)  Assignments of hemesites for beneficial use and occupancy 

shall be made by the district councils under the customary 
procedures of their respective communities, or in accordance 
with ordinances enacted by the Tohono O’odham Council and 
approved by the district councils.

(b)  Every member of the Tohono O'odham Nation who is the head of 

a family that does not own any land under allotment, or who 
agrees to transfer such land, including interests in land in 
heirship status, to the Tohono O'odham Nation, shall be 
entitled to receive a homesite assignment if land is 
available.

(c) Any member of the Tohono O'odham Nation who owns an allotment 
of land or any share in heirship land or any deeded land may, 
voluntar
with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, 

ily transfer interests in such land to the Tohono O’odham Nation 
and receive therefor an assignment to the same land or to land 
of equal value.

Section 5. Lands of the Tohono O'odham Nation which are not under use, 
permit, lease or other disposition authorized by the Tohono O'odham Council, and 
which are not under assignment made by a district council, may be used for commu
nal pastures and gardens by the various districts, or for public purposes of any 
sort. Such lands may be leased by the district council consistent with federal 
law and one-half (1/2) of the proceeds of such leases shall accrue to the Tohono 
O'odham Council and one—half (1/2) to the district council; provided that such 
leases are subject to approval by the Secretary of the Interior and all leases

to nonmembers, and leases to members in excess of a reasonable acreage, shall be 
subject to the approval of the Tohono O’odham Council.

Section 6. To the extent consistent with federal law, all individual develop
ments on lands of the Tohono O’odham Nation, such as water developments, farms 
and homes, shall be held as personal property and shall be subject to disposal 
in accordance with the customary procedures of the district council or in 
accordance with ordinances enacted by the Tohono O’odham Council and approved 
by the district council.

Section 7. The right to continued use and occupancy of buildings and 
grounds for religious and educational purposes, which were in use for these 
purposes by any church or missionary organization on January 1, 1936, is 
hereby confirmed; provided that the buildings and grounds shall, in the 
discretion of the Tohono O’odham Council, revert to the Tohono O’odham 
Nation when no longer used for such religious or educational purposes by such 
church or missionary organization.

Section 8. It shall be the policy of the Tohono O'odham Nation to 
encourage owners of allotted lands not to devise, sell or give such lands 
to any person who is not a member of the Tohono O’odham Nation without giving 
the Tohono O'odham Nation an opportunity to purchase such lands.

Section 9. It shall be the policy of the Tohono O'odham Nation to seek 
the return to the Tohono O'odham Nation of lands and natural resources, 
including minerals and water rights, within or adjacent to the Tohono O’odham 
Nation, or which originally were a part of the historic Papagueria.

Section 10. In order to carry out the foregoing policies, it shall be the 
continuing responsibility of the Tohono O'odham Council each year to designate 
a certain percentage of the proceeds derived from natural resources of the 
Tohono O'odham Nation and, consistent with other essential considerations of 
Tohono O’odham national policy, to allocate and invest the designated 
proceeds for the purpose of acquiring such lands, natural resources, minerals 
and water rights.
 
 

ARTICLE XVII -WATER POLICY

 
 Section 1. All waters which originate in or flow in, into or through the 
Tohono O'odham Nation, or which are stored in the Tohono O’odham Nation, whether 
found on the surface or underground, are a valuable public resource of the Tohono 
O'odham Nation to be protected for the present and future use of the Tohono 
O'odham Nation as a whole.

Section 2. The Tohono O'odham Council shall have, consistent with federal 
law, the control and management of these waters and shall have the power to:

(a)  Determine how these waters shall be developed, used and 

conserved for the greatest public benefit.

(b)  Enter into agreements, compacts or other contracts for the 

beneficial use, sale, or lease or distribution of these 
waters.

(c)  Regulate all water use within the Tohono O'odham Nation 

through a system of non-perpetual permits and to maintain a 
registry of such permits.

(d)  Establish a water commission or board which shall, subject 

to the direction of the council, have general supervision of 
these waters and of the licensing, measurement, use and 
distribution thereof.
 
 

ARTICLE XVIII - ENVIRONMENTAL POLICY

 
 Section 1. It shall be the policy of the Tohono O’odham Nation to 
encourage productive and enjoyable harmony between members of the nation and 
their environment; to promote efforts which will preserve and protect the 
natural and cultural environment of the Tohono O'odham Nation, including its 
lands, air, water, flora and fauna, its ecological systems, and natural 
resources, and its historic and cultural artifacts and archeological sites; 
and to create and maintain conditions under which members of the nation and 
nature can exist in productive harmony and fulfill the social, economic, and 
other requirements of present and future generations of members of the 
Tohono O'odham Nation.

Section 2. In order to carry out the foregoing policy, it shall be the 
continuing responsibility of the Tohono O'odham Council to use all practical 
means, consistent with other essential considerations of Tohono O'odham 
national policy, to improve and coordinate its plans, functions, programs and 
resources to the end that the Tohono O’odham Nation may:

(a)  Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee 

of the environment for succeeding generations;

(b)  Assure for all members safe, healthful, productive and 
esthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings;

(c)  Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment 

without degradation, risk to health or safety or ocher 
undesirable and unintended consequences;

(d)  Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of 
Tohono O’odham national heritage, and maintain, wherever 
possible, an environment which supports diversity and a 
variety of individual choice;

(e)  Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the 

maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources.
 
 

ARTICLE XIX - SUPREMACY OF CONSTITUTION

 
 Section 1. 
heretofore enacted by the Papago Tribe shall remain in full force and effect to 
the extent that they are consistent with this constitution.

Any existing resolutions, ordinances or other legislation 

Section 2. 
express words they are declared to be otherwise.

The provisions of this constitution are mandatory unless by 
 
 

ARTICLE XX  - SEVERABILITY

 
 If any provisions of this constitution, or the applicability thereof, be held 
invalid by a court of competent jurisdiction, such invalidity shall not affect 
other provisions which can be given effect without the invalid provisions, and 
to this end, the provisions of the constitution are declared to be severable.
 
 

ARTICLE XXI  - REPEAL

 
 The Constitution and Bylaws of the Papago Tribe, as amended, ratified by the 
adult Indians of the Papago Tribe on December 12, 1936, and approved by the 
Secretary of the Interior on January 6, 1937, is hereby repealed and superseded 
by this constitution.
 
 

ARTICLE XXII  - AMENDMENTS

 
 Section 1. Any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Tohono O’odham 
Nation, but not expressly referred to in this constitution, shall not be 
abridged by this constitution, but may be exercised by the members of the 
Tohono O’odham Nation through the adoption of appropriate constitutional 
amendments.

Section 2. This constitution may be amended by a majority vote of the 
registered voters of the Tohono O’odham Nation voting in an election called for 
that purpose by the Secretary of the Interior provided that at least thirty 
percent (30%) of those duly registered to vote shall vote in such an election; 
but no amendment shall become effective until it has been approved by the Secretary of the Interior.

Interior to call an election for any proposed amendment at the request of the 
Tohono O’odham Council or upon receipt of a petition signed by at least 
one-third of the registered voters of the Tohono O’odham Nation.

It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the 
 
 

ARTICLE XXIII  - ADOPTION

 
 This constitution, when adopted by a majority vote of the qualified voters or 
the Tohono O’odham Nation, voting at an election called for that purpose by the 
Secretary of the Interior in which at least thirty percent (30%) of those 
entitled to vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior) 
for his approval and, if approved, shall be effective from the time of such 
approval.
 
 

ARTICLE XXIV  - CERTIFICATE OF RESULTS OF ELECTIONS

 
 Pursuant to an order issued August 26, 1935, by John W. Fritz 

Deputy Assistant Secretary - Indian Affairs (Operations), the foregoing 

Constitution of the Tohono O’odham Nation was submitted for adoption to the 

qualified voters of the nation and was on January 18, 1986, duly adopted/

rejected by a vote of 1 ,236 , for, and 944 against, in an election in which 

at least thirty percent (30%) of the 3,336 entitled to vote, cast their 

ballots in accordance with Section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984) as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 

(49 Stat. 378) and May 1, 1936 (49 Stat. 1250).
 
 

ARTICLE XXV - APPROVAL

 
 I, Ronald L. Esguerra, Deputy Assistant Secretary -
Indian Affairs (Operations) by virtue of the authority granted to the Secretary 
of the Interior by the Act of June 13, 1934 (43 Stat. 984), as amended, and 
delegated to me by 209 D.M. 8.3, do hereby approve the Constitution of the 
Tohono O'Odham Nation. It is effective as of this date; provided that 
nothing in this approval shall be construed as authorizing any action under 
this document that would be contrary to Federal law.

Washington, D.C.

Date: MAR

6 1986

