 
  
  
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS 

 
 + 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS

OF THE

UTE MOUNTAIN TRIBE OF THE 
UTE MOUNTAIN RESERVATION 
COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, UTAH


 
  
  
 APPROVED JUNE 6, 1940 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE 

 
 WASHINGTON : 1940 
 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS


 
 APR 11 1941 
 

DIVISION OF DOCUMENTS

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS OF THE UTE MOUNTAIN 
TRIBE OF THE UTE MOUNTAIN RESERVATION IN 
COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, UTAH

PREAMBLE


We, the people of the Ute Mountain Tribe of the Ute Mountain 
Reservation, in Colorado, New Mexico and Utah, under the jurisdiction 
of the Consolidated Ute Agency, Ignacio, Colorado, in order to ex
ercise the rights of self-government, to administer our tribal affairs, 
to preserve, develop and increase our tribal resources, do ordain and 
establish this Constitution.

Article I—Jurisdiction

The jurisdiction of the Ute Mountain Tribe of the Ute Mountain 
Reservation through its General Council, the Ute Mountain Tribal 
Council, and its Court, shall extend to the lands now included within 
the Ute Mountain Reservation and to such other land as may be 
added thereto.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Ute Mountain Tribe of the Ute 

Mountain Reservation shall consist of the following:

(a) All persons of Ute Indian blood duly enrolled on the 1939 
census of the Ute Mountain Reservation: Provided, That within two 
years from the adoption and approval of this Constitution and By
laws additions and changes may be made by the Council, subject to 
the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.

(b)  And all children born to any member if such children shall be 

of one-half or more degree of Ute Indian blood.

Sec. 2. The Council shall have the power to pass ordinances, subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, covering future 
membership.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Ute Mountain Tribe of the 
Ute Mountain Reservation, which includes Allen Canyon, shall be 
known as the “Ute Mountain Tribal Council.”

Seo. 2. The Council shall be composed of seven members, one of 
whom shall be elected annually by the members of the Allen Canyon 
(Utah) Community. The Council when it meets after each annual 
election, shall choose from its membership; a chairman, a secretary
custodian, a treasurer, and such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary.

Sec. 3. The Council shall have the power to district the reservation 
and to apportion representation, subject to a referendum of the people, 
whenever such action is deemed advisable by the Council.

2

Sec. 4. Members of the Council shall be at least twenty-five years of 
age, and permanent residents of the reservation. No person who has 
been convicted of a felony shall be eligible for membership on the 
Council.

Sec. 5. The first election of the Council shall be held within sixty 
days after the adoption and approval of this Constitution; and there
after, the annual election shall be held on the second Friday in 
October. The councilmen elected at this first meeting shall serve 
until the first annual election in 1941.

Sec. 6. At the first annual election after the adoption of this 
Constitution, the members of the Towaoc Community shall meet and 
elect two members of the Council for one year; two members for 
two years; and two members for three years; thereafter, two mem
bers shall be elected, annually, by the Towaoc Community for a 
three-year period. The Allen Canyon Community shall meet and 
elect their councilman as provided for in sections 2 and 5 of this 
Article.

Sec. 7. Any councilman who may resign, die, or be removed from 
his office, shall be replaced only at a regular election or at a special 
election called by the Council. Any councilman convicted of a felony 
or misdemeanor involving dishonesty in a Federal, State or Indian 
Court may be removed from office by a two-thirds vote of the 
Council.

Sec. 8. Members of the Council shall take office on the first Friday 

of the first month after their election.

Article IV—Nominations and Elections

Section 1. Any resident member, male or female, 21 years of age 
or over, and otherwise qualified, shall be entitled to vote at any 
election.

Sec. 2. All elections shall be announced by the Superintendent, 
or by an officer of the tribe designated by the Council, through a 
circular letter to the Ute Mountain Indians at least ten days before 
the election.

Sec. 3. Candidates for election to the Council shall be nominated 
at and appear before General Councils to be held at Ute Mountain 
Sub-Agency, and Allen Canyon. They shall then be seated, after 
which voting shall take place. Voting shall be by show of hands.
Sec. 4. Notice of special elections shall be given in the same 

manner as that for general or regular elections.

Article V—Powers of the Council

Sec. 1. The Council of the Ute Mountain Tribe shall exercise the 

following powers:

(a)  To negotiate with Federal, State and local governments.
(b)  To prevent the sale, disposition, lease or encumbrance of tribal 
lands, interests in lands, or other tribal assets, without the consent 
of the tribe. Leases shall be made by the Council, subject to the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, in accordance with the 
existing law, but no lease shall be made to a non-member of the 
tribe unless it has been approved by and authorized by the Council.

3

(c)  To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the Ute 
Mountain Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation prior to the sub
mission of such estimates to the Bureau of the Budget and to 
Congress.

(d) To select subordinate boards, tribal officials, and employees 
of the Council not otherwise provided for in this Constitution and 
to prescribe their tenure and duties.

(e) To promulgate ordinances regulating the domestic relations 

of members of the tribe.

(f) To make rules and regulations governing its own procedure.
(g) To approve or veto expenditures from tribal funds which 

may be proposed by the Secretary of the Interior.

(h) To manage the tribal herds, particularly with regard to the 
selling of steers, lambs, wool, the purchasing of fresh stock, the dis
tribution of the increase to the members as individual cattle and 
sheep owners, and the protection of the herds and the range against 
encroachments.

(i)  To employ legal counsel for the protection and advancement 
of the Ute Mountain Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation, the 
choice of counsel and the fixing of fees to be subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior.

(j)  To pass ordinances, subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior, covering the activities of voluntary associations consisting 
of members of the tribe organized for the purpose of cooperation or 
for other purposes, and to enforce the observance of such ordinances.

(k)  To provide by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary of 
the Interior, for the removal of exclusion from the reservation of 
any nonmembers whose presence may be injurious to members of the 
tribe.

(l)  To provide by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, for the appointment of guardians for minors and 
mental incompetents.

(m)  To prescribe rules for the inheritance of property other than 

allotted lands.

(n)  To regulate the conduct of members of the tribe and to protect 
the public peace, safety, morals and welfare of the reservation through 
the promulgation and enforcement of ordinances, subject to review 
by the Secretary of the Interior, to effectuate these purposes.

(o)  To appropriate funds for salaries of tribal officers and for public 

purposes from available funds of the tribe.

(p)  To regulate by ordinance, subject to review by the Secretary of 

the Interior, nonmembers doing business on the reservation.

Sec. 2. The Council may exercise such further powers as may be 
delegated to the Ute Mountain Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior 
or any other qualified official or agency of government, and may exer
cise any rights and powers heretofore vested in the Ute Mountain 
Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation but not expressly referred to 
in this Constitution.

Sec. 3. Manner of Review.—Any resolution or ordinance which by 
the terms of this Constitution is subject to review by the Secretary 
of the Interior, shall be presented to the Superintendent of the res
ervation, who shall, within two weeks thereafter, approve or disap

4

prove the same. If he approves an ordinance or resolution, it shall 
thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent shall transmit a 
copy of the same, bearing his endorsement to the Secretary of the 
Interior, who may, within 90 days from the date of enactment, rescind 
the said ordinance or resolution for any cause by notifying the Tribal 
Council of his action. If the Superintendent refuses to approve any 
ordinance or resolution submitted to him within two weeks after its 
enactment, he shall advise the Tribal Council of his reasons. The 
Tribal Council may by a majority vote refer the ordinance or resolu
tion to the Secretary of the Interior who may within 90 days from 
its enactment, approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordi
nance or resolution shall become effective.

Article VI—General Council

The General Council, consisting of all the voters of the Ute Moun
tain Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation, shall assemble at such 
times as the Council shall call them together for the discussion of 
matters relating to the public welfare. A General Council may be 
called upon a petition signed by a majority of the qualified voters 
of the reservation.

Article VII—Land

The reservation, land now unallotted shall remain tribal property 
and shall not be allotted to individuals in severalty, but assignment of 
land for private use may be made by the Tribal Council in conformity 
with ordinances which may be adopted on this subject and approved 
by the Secretary of the Interior.

Article VIII—Referendum

By a majority vote of the Council, or upon a petition signed by at least 
25 percent of the voters of the Ute Mountain Reservation, any proposed 
or enacted ordinance or resolution of the Tribal Council shall be sub
mitted to an election of the Tribe. A majority of those voting shall 
determine the validity of such ordinance or resolution. No ordinance 
or resolution submitted to referendum shall be in effect until approved 
in the referendum.

Article IX—Amendments

Amendments to this Constitution may be proposed by a majority vote 
of the Tribal Council, and may be ratified and approved in the same 
manner as this Constitution and By-laws.
 
 

BYLAWS OF THE UTE MOUNTAIN TRIBE OF THE UTE MOUNTAIN 
 
 RESERVATION—COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, UTAH

Article I—Meetings of the Tribal Council

Section 1. At the first meeting of the Council after a regular elec
tion, the Council shall see that its members have a correct and clear 
understanding of the Constitution and By-laws, and of the general 
management of the tribal and reservation affairs as well as of the 
rules for the conduct of its own business.

5

Sec. 2. The regular meetings of the Council shall be held on a date 
decided on at a previous meeting of the Council, but meetings shall be 
held once a month at the Ute Mountain Sub-Agency, or other desig
nated place.

Sec. 3. Special meetings of the Tribal Council may be called by the 
Chairman or by request of two or more members of the Council. 
Notice of such special meeting shall be given to every member of the 
Council and to the Superintendent or person in charge of the Sub
Agency as promptly as possible.

Sec. 4. Matters of business before the Council shall be decided by a 
majority vote of the quorum present. Five members of the Tribal 
Council must be present at any regular or special meeting in order 
to transact tribal business. In the absence of the chairman, the 
remaining members of the Council may elect a temporary chairman.

Article II—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman of the Council shall preside over all meet
ings of the Council, shall perform all duties of a chairman and exer
cise any authority given to him by the Council or by a General 
Council of the Tribe. He shall vote only in case of a tie.

Sec. 2. The Secretary-Custodian shall be chosen by the Council 
from among its members if there is among them a person able to 
perform such duties; otherwise the Council may elect a Secretary
Custodian from the outside. If chosen from outside the Council, the 
Secretary-Custodian shall have no vote. If a Council member is able 
to perform common secretarial duties but not to conduct more diffi
cult secretarial business, he may have a competent assistant from 
outside the Council. As long as the Federal Government gives 
help in health and educational service, a Superintendent, and other 
advisory officials, it may be represented at the Council meetings by 
a delegate without vote, and such delegate may be selected by the 
Council to serve as Secretary. To such a secretary, or other employee 
of the United States Government, selected by the Council, shall be 
entrusted for the time heretofore referred to, the safe-keeping of all 
valuable papers and records of the Council and the Tribe, such papers 
to be kept in the agency office and be accessible to the Council chair
man and other authorized persons.

Sec. 3. The Council treasurer shall be the custodian of all monies 
which may come under the jurisdiction or into the control of the 
Council. He shall pay out money in accordance with the orders and 
resolutions of the Council. He shall keep account of all receipts and 
disbursements and shall report the same to the Council at each regu
lar meeting. He shall be bonded in such amount as the Council may 
by resolution, approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs, pro
vide. The books of the Council treasurer shall be subject to audit or 
inspection at the direction of the Council or the Commissioner of 
Indian Affairs. Until the Treasurer is bonded, the Council may 
make such provision for the custody and disbursement of funds as 
shall guarantee their safety and proper disbursement and use.

6

Article III—Adoption of Constitution and By-Laws

This Constitution and By-laws, when adopted by a majority vote 
of the qualified voters of the Ute Mountain Tribe of the Ute Moun
tain Reservation, voting at a special election called by the Secretary 
of the Interior, in which at least thirty percent of those entitled to 
vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior 
for his approval and shall be in force from the date of such approval.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved April 9, 1940, by the Assistant 
Secretary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the members of the Ute Mountain Tribe 
of the Ute Mountain Reservation and was on May 8, 1940, duly 
adopted by a vote of 91 for, and 12 against, in an election in which 
more than 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in ac
cordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 
18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 1935 (49 
Stat. 378).

Emma South Beecher, 
Chairman, Election Board. 
Lewis E. Wing,
Secretary, Election Board.
Jack Hight, Judge.

S. F. Stacker,

Superintendent, Consolidated Ute Agency.

I, Oscar L. Chapman, the Assistant Secretary of the Interior of 
the United States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me 
by the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby 
approve the attached Constitution and By-laws of the Ute Mountain 
Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation.

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may be 
incompatible with any of the provisions of the said constitution and 
by-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to the members of the Ute 
Mountain Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said constitution and by-laws.

Approval recommended May 23, 1940.

William Zimmerman, Jr.

Assistant Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Oscar L. Chapman,

Assistant Secretary.
[seal]

Washington, D. C., June 6,1940.
o


AMENDMENT TO THE CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
OF THE UTE MOUNTAIN TRIBE OF THE UTE MOUNTAIN 
RESERVATION, COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, UTAH

AMENDMENT I


Article V, section 1 (o) of the Constitution of the Ute Mountain Tribe shall be amended to read as follows:

(o) To appropriate available funds of the tribe for salaries and expenses of tribal officers and for public 
purposes, including relief of members of the tribe, contributions to charity, and per capita payments to 
recognized members of the tribe: Provided, That the amount distributed per capita in any one year shall not 
exceed one-half of the unreserved accumulated net operating profits from tribal enterprises without prior 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order approved December 1, 1949, by the Assistant Secretary of the Interior, the attached Amendment 

I to the Constitution and Bylaws of the Ute Mountain Tribe, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah, was submitted for 
ratification to the Indians of the Ute Mountain Reservation and was on January 3, 1950, duly adopted by a vote of 69 
for, and 0 against, in an election in which over 30 percent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, in accordance with 
section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the act of June 15, 1935 (49 
Stat. 378).
 
 

GEORGE MILLS,

 
 Chairman, Ute Mountain Tribal Council.

MARK D. BOYKO,

Secretary, Ute Mountain Tribal Council.

FLOYD E. MACSPADDEN,

Superintendent, Consolidated Ute Agency.
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, William E. Warne, Assistant Secretary of the Interior of the United States of America, by virtue of the authority 

granted me by the act of June 18, 1934, ( 48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached Amendment I, 
amending the Constitution of the Ute Mountain Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation, Colorado, New Mexico, and 
Utah.

Approval recommended: February 6, 1950.

JOHN R. NICHOLS,

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

WASHINGTON, D. C., February 7, 1950.

WILLIAM E. WARNE,

Assistant Secretary of the Interior.
[SEAL]

U.S. GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE: 1951
 
  
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS
 
 approval 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS 
OF THE
UTE MOUNTAIN TRIBE
OF THE
UTE MOUNTAIN RESERVATION, 
COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, UTAH

AMENDMENT II


Article IV, Section 1 of the Constitution of the Ute 
Mountain Tribe shall be amended to read as follows: 

"Any resident member 18 years of age or over, and 
otherwise qualified, shall be entitled to vote at 
any election."

Article IV, Section 3 shall be amended to read as follows:

To change the last sentence to read "Voting shall 
be by secret ballot.”
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 l, Ronald L. Esquerra, Area Director, Albuquerque Area 
Office, by virtue of the delegated authority granted to 
me and the requirements of the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 
Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve the attached 
Amendment II, amending the Constitution of the Ute 
Mountain Ute Tribe of the Ute Mountain Reservation, 
Colorado, New Mexico and Utah.

Ronald L. Esquerra
Area Director

Albuquerque, New Mexico
Date: October 7, 1976

Area Director
Albuquerque Area Office 
Bureau of Indian Affairs 
5301Central'Avenue, N.E., Room 517 
P.O. Box8327 
Albuquerque,. NM 87108

Dear sir:

Certificate of Results of Election: .

Pursuant to an election authorized by the Secretary of the 

Interio~ on September 21, 1976, the attached amendment .to 

the Constitution of the Ute Mountain Tribe was submitted 

to the qualified voters of the Tribe and was on Oct. 6, 1976

adopted by a vote of 81 for and 13

against,in an election which at least 30% of the 

members entitled to vote cast their ballot in accordance 

with Section 16 of the Indian Re-organlzation Act of 

June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of 

June15,1935 (49:Stat.378).
 
 

APPROVAL

 
 I, RONALD L. ESQUERRA Area Director, Albuquerque Area 

Office, by virtue of the delegated authority granted to me and 

the requirements of the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), 

as amended, do hereby approve the attached Amendment II, amending 

the Constitution of the Ute Mountain Ute Tribe of the Ute Mountain 

Reservation, Colorado, New Mexico and Utah.

/s/ Ronald L. Esquerra

Area Director

Albuquerque, New Mexico

Date: October 7, 1976


CONSTITUTION AND BYLAWS

OF THE

UTE MOUNTAIN TRIBE

OF THE

UTE MOUNTAIN RESERVATION, COLORADO, NEW MEXICO, UTAH

AMENDMENT III


Article IV, Section 3 of the Constitution of the Ute Mountain

Tribe shall be amended to read as follows:

To change the last sentence to read "Voting shall

be by secret ballot."

