 
  
  
 UNITED STATES  
 
DEPARTMENT OF THE INTERIOR 

OFFICE OF INDIAN AFFAIRS

 
 4- 
 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE 
WALKER RIVER PAIUTE TRIBE 
OF NEVADA


 
  
  
 APPROVED MARCH 26, 1937 
 

UNITED STATES 

GOVERNMENT PRINTING OFFICE

 
 WASHINGTON : 1937 
 

LIBRARY OF CONGRESS 


 
 JUN 2 1937  
 

DIVISION OF DOCUMENTS 

CONSTITUTION AND BY-LAWS OF THE WALKER RIVER 
PAIUTE TRIBE OF NEVADA

PREAMBLE


We, the members of the Walker River Paiute Tribe of the Walker 
River Reservation in Nevada, in order to establish a more unified 
tribal organization and to insure and promote the best interests of 
our society, industry, prosperity, and the general welfare of our
selves and our posterity do hereby establish this Constitution and 
By-laws.

Article I—Territory

The jurisdiction of the Walker River Paiute Tribe under this 
Constitution and By-laws shall extend to the territory within the 
confines of the Walker River Reservation as established by Execu
tive Order dated March 19, 1874, under the administration of U.S. 
Grant, and to such other lands that have been added thereto, or may 
be hereafter added thereto.

Article II—Membership

Section 1. The membership of the Walker River Paiute Tribe 

shall consist as follows:

(a) All persons of Indian blood whose names appear on the official 
census roll of the Walker River Paiute Tribe at the Carson Indian 
Agency as of January 1, 1935: Provided, That within one (1) year 
from the adoption and approval of this Constitution and By-laws 
corrections may be made in said roll by the Tribal Council, subject 
to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior. 

(b) All children bom to any member of the Walker River Paiute 
Tribe who is a resident of the Walker River Reservation at the 
time of the birth of said children.

(c) Any person of one-half or more Indian blood married to a 
member of the Walker River Paiute Tribe, provided such person re
quests, in writing, admission to the Tribe and declares his willingness 
to renounce his membership in or affiliation with any other tribe.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council shall have power to promulgate ordi
nances, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, covering 
future membership including adoptions and the loss of membership.

Article III—Governing Body

Section 1. The governing body of the Walker River Paiute Tribe 
shall consist of a council known as the “Walker River Paiute Tribal 
Council.”

Sec. 2. This Tribal Council shall consist of seven (7) members duly 

elected to serve three years.

Sec. 3. The Tribal Council shall select from the members of the 
Council, (1) a Chairman; (2) a Vice Chairman; and from within or 

138024—37 

/-fl

2

without. (3) a Secretary: and (4) a Treasurer. The Tribal Council 
may appoint or employ such other officers and committees as may be 
deemed necessary. Officers shall be elected annually at the first 
meeting of the Council, after the annual election of councilmen, and 
shall serve until the first council meeting after the next annual 
election.

Sec. 4. The first election for the Tribal Council hereunder shall 
be called, held and supervised by the present Tribal Council, within 
sixty (60) days after ratification and approval of this Constitution. 
The three (3) candidates for councilmen receiving the highest num
ber of votes shall serve until the annual election in November, 1939; 
the two (2) candidates receiving the next highest number of votes 
shall serve until the annual election in November, 1938; and the two 
(2) candidates receiving the third highest number of votes shall 
serve until the annual election in November, 1937, and they shall 
hold office until their successors are duly elected and qualified.

Article IV—Elections and Nominations for the Tribal Council

Section 1. All enrolled members of the Walker River Paiute Tribe 
twenty-one (21) years of age or over who have maintained legal 
residence on the Reservation for a period of one (1) year immedi
ately prior to any election, shall have the right to vote.

Sec. 2. All elections shall be by secret ballot.
Sec. 3. After the first election, elections shall be held every year 
on the third Tuesday of November and newly elected officers shall 
assume their duties on the first day of December following the 
election.

Sec. 4. Nomination of candidates for office under this Constitu
tion shall be by petition signed by not less than ten (10) legal voters. 
A voter may sign only one petition for each office. Petitions for 
nomination shall be filed with the Secretary of the Tribal Council1 
at least thirty (30) days prior to the election for which the candidate 
makes such petition. The list of qualified candidates shall be posted 
by the Secretary of the Tribal Council at the Agency office and in 
not less than two conspicuous places on the Reservation two weeks 
prior to the election.

Sec. 5. All elections shall be held in accordance with rules and 
regulations laid down by the Tribal Council or by an election board 
appointed by the Tribal Council.

Article V—Vacancies and Removal from Office

Section 1. If an officer or a member of the Council shall die, re
sign, be removed or recalled from office, permanently leave the Reser
vation or shall be found guilty of a felony or misdemeanor involv- 
ing dishonesty, in any Indian, State or Federal court, the Tribal 
Council shall declare the position vacant and appoint to fill the un
expired term.

Sec. 2. The Tribal Council may by the affirmative vote of four (4) 
members expel any member for neglect of duty or gross misconduct. 
Before any vote for expulsion is taken in the matter, such member or 
officer shall be given an opportunity to answer any or all charges at 
a designated council meeting and the decision of the Tribal Council 
shall be final.

3

Sec. 3. Recall from office.—Upon receipt of a petition signed by 
one-third (⅓) of the eligible voters calling for the recall of any 
member of the Tribal Council, it shall be the duty of the Council to 
call an election on such recall petition. No member may be recalled 
in any such election unless at least thirty (30) per cent of the legal 
voters of the Tribe shall vote at such election.

Article VI—Powers of the Tribal Council

Section 1. Enumerated powers.—The Tribal Council shall exer
cise the following powers, subject to any limitations imposed by the 
Constitution or Statutes of the United States, and subject further 
to all express restrictions upon such powers contained in this Con
stitution and the attached By-laws:

(a) To negotiate with the Federal, State, and local Governments 
on behalf of the Tribe and to advise and consult with the represent
atives of the Interior Department on all activities of the Depart
ment that may affect the Walker River Paiute Tribe.

(b)  To employ counsel for the protection and advancement of the 
rights of the Tribe and its members, the choice of counsel and fixing 
of fees to be subject to the approval of the Secretary of the Interior.
(c)  To approve or veto any sale, disposition, lease, or encumbrance 
of tribal lands, interests in lands or other tribal assets, which may be 
authorized or executed by the Secretary of the Interior, the Com
missioner of Indian Affairs, or any other qualified official or agency 
of government: Provided, That no tribal lands shall ever be leased 
for a period exceeding ten years, sold, or encumbered, except for 
governmental or public service purposes.

(d) To advise the Secretary of the Interior with regard to all 
appropriation estimates or Federal projects for the benefit of the 
Tribe prior to the submission of such estimates to the Bureau of 
the Budget and to Congress.

(e)  To make assignments of tribal land to members of the Tribe 
and to regulate the leasing of assignments in conformity with Article 
VIII of this Constitution.

(f) To manage all economic affairs and enterprises of the Tribe 
in accordance with the terms of a charter which may be issued to the 
Tribe by the Secretary of the Interior.

(g)  To appropriate for public purposes of the Walker River 
Paiute Tribe available funds within the exclusive control of the 
Tribe, and, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, any 
other available tribal funds.

(A.) To levy assessments upon members of the Tribe and to require 
the performance of reservation labor in lieu thereof, and to levy 
assessments or license fees, subject to review by the Secretary of the 
Interior, upon nonmembers doing business within the Reservation: 
Provided, however, That any such assessment upon members of the 
Tribe shall have the approval of the eligible voters of the Tribe at 
a special election at which thirty per cent (30%) of the eligible 
voters shall vote. 

(i)  To purchase lands of members of the Tribe for public pur
poses, under condemnation proceedings in courts of competent 
jurisdiction.
 
 

 
 
 4

(j)  To safeguard and promote the peace, safety, morals, and gen
eral welfare of the Tribe by regulating the conduct of trade and 
the use and disposition of propertv upon the Reservation: Provided, 
That any ordinance directly affecting nonmembers of the Tribe shall 
be subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior: And provided 
further. That nonrestricted property of members which was obtained 
outside of any help or assistance of the Government or the Tribe may 
be disposed of without restrictions.

(k)  To regulate the inheritance of property, real and personal, 
other than allotted lands, within the territory of the Walker River 
Reservation, subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(l)  To regulate the manner of making nominations for tribal offices 

and of holding elections.

(m)  To adopt resolutions regulating the procedure of the Tribal 

Council itself and of other tribal agencies and tribal officials.

(n)  To encourage and foster the arts, crafts, traditions, and 

culture of the Walker River Paiute Tribe.

(o)  To charter subordinate organizations for economic purposes 
and to regulate the activities of such cooperative associations of 
members of the Tribe, under ordinances which shall be subject to 
review by the Secretary of the Interior.

(p)  To protect and preserve the property, wild life, and natural 

resources of the Tribe.

(q)  To delegate to subordinate boards, or tribal officials, or to 
cooperative associations which are open to all members of the Tribe, 
any of the foregoing powers, reserving the right to review any 
actions taken by virtue of such delegated power.

Sec. 2. Any resolution or ordinance, which, by the terms of this 
Constitution, is subject to review by the Secretary of the Interior, 
shall be presented to the Superintendent of the Reservation, who 
shall, within ten (10) days thereafter, approve or disapprove the 
same. If the Superintendent shall approve any ordinance or reso
lution, it shall thereupon become effective, but the Superintendent 
shall transmit a copy of the same, bearing his endorsement, to the 
Secretary of the Interior, who may, within ninety (90) days from 
the date of enactment, rescind the said ordinance or resolution for 
any cause by notifying the Tribal Council of such decision.

If the Superintendent shall refuse to approve any resolution or 
ordinance submitted to him within ten (10) days of its enactment, 
he shall advise the Tribal Council of his reasons therefor. If these 
reasons appear to the Tribal Council insufficient, it may by a majority 
vote refer the ordinance or resolution to the Secretary of the Interior, 
who may, within ninety (90) days from the date of its enactment, 
approve the same in writing, whereupon the said ordinance or 
resolution shall become effective.

Sec. 3. Future powers.—The Tribal Council may exercise such 
further powers as may in the future be delegated to the Tribe by the 
Secretary of the Interior, or by any duly authorized official or agency 
of the State or Federal Government.

Sec. 4. Reserved powers.—Any rights and powers heretofore vested 
in the Walker River Paiute Tribe, but not expressly referred to in 
this Constitution, shall not be abridged by this Article, but may be 
exercised by the people of the Walker River Paiute Tribe, through 
the adoption of appropriate by-laws and constitutional amendments.

5

Article VII—Referendum

Any exercise of any enumerated powers lodged in the Tribal 
Council shall be subject to a referendum vote of the people upon 
a written petition signed by not less than 25 per cent of the total 
number of voters in the last annual election: Provided, That not less 
than 30 per cent of the eligible voting population shall vote in any 
such referendum.

Article VIII—Land

Section 1. Allotted lands, including heirship lands, within the 
Walker River Reservation shall continue to be held as heretofore by 
their present owners. It is recognized that under existing law, such 
lands may be condemned for public purposes, such as roads, public 
buildings or other public improvements, upon payment of adequate 
compensation by any agency of the State of Nevada or of the Federal 
Government or by the Tribe itself. It is further recognized that under 
existing law, such lands may be inherited by the heirs of the present 
owner, whether or not they are members of the Walker River Paiute 
Tribe. Likewise, it is recognized that under existing law, the Secre
tary of the Interior may, in his discretion, remove restrictions upon 
such land, upon application by the Indian owner, whereupon the 
land will become subject to State taxes and may then be mortgaged 
or sold. The right of the individual Indian to hold or to lose his 
land under existing law shall not be abrogated by anything contained 
in this Constitution, but the owner of restricted land may, with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior, voluntarily convey his land 
to the Walker River Paiute Tribe either in exchange for a money 
payment or in exchange for an assignment covering the same land 
or other land, as hereinafter provided.

Sec. 2. Tribal lands of the Walker River Paiute Tribe and all lands 
which may hereafter be acquired by the Walker River Paiute Tribe 
or by the United States in trust for the Walker River Paiute 
Tribe shall be held as tribal lands, and no part of such lands shall be 
mortgaged or sold.

Sec. 3. Tribal lands shall not be allotted to individual Indians, 
but such tribal lands as are not required for school, agency, or other 
administrative use may be assigned by the Tribal Council to mem
bers of the Walker River Paiute Tribe, or may be leased or otherwise 
used by the Tribe as hereinafter provided for.

Sec. 4. Tribal lands may be leased by the Tribal Council with the 
approval of the Secretary of the Interior in accordance with law. 
Preference shall be given; first, to Indian cooperative associations; 
and second, to individual Indians who are members of the Walker 
River Paiute Tribe. No lease of tribal lands to a nonmember shall 
be made by the Tribal Council unless it shall appear that no Indian 
cooperative association or individual member of the Tribe is able and 
willing to use the land and to pay a reasonable fee for such use.

Sec. 5. In any assignment of tribal lands which are now owned by 
the Tribe or which may hereafter be acquired for the Tribe by the 
United States or purchased by the Tribe out of tribal funds, or which 
may be designated for the use of the Tribe, preference shall be given; 
first, to heads of families which are entirely landless; and second, to 
heads of families which have no allotted lands or interests in allotted 

6

lands, but shall have already received assignments consisting of less 
than an economic unit of agricultural land or other land or interests 
in land of equal value, such economic unit to be determined by the 
Tribal Council in ordinances which shall be subject to review by the 
Secretary of the Interior or his designated representatives. Assign
ments under this section shall be known as “Standard” assignments.
No member of the Tribe who may hereafter have the restrictions 
upon his land removed and whose land may thereafter be alienated 
shall be entitled to receive an assignment of land as a landless Indian.
The Tribal Council may, if it sees fit, charge a fee of $5.00 on 

approval of an assignment made under this Section.

Sec. 6. If any person holding a standard assignment of land shall 
for a period of two years fail to use the lands so assigned or shall 
use the land for any unlawful purpose, his assignment may be can
celled by the Tribal Council after due notice and opportunity to be 
heard. Such land may then be available for reassignment.

Upon the death of any Indian holding a standard assignment, his 
heirs or other individuals designated by him by written request shall 
have preference in the reassignment of the land, provided such per
sons are eligible to receive a standard assignment.

Sec. 7. Any member of the Walker River Paiute Tribe who owns 
an allotment of land or any share in heirship land or any deeded 
land may, with the approval of the Secretary of the Interior, volun
tarily transfer his interest in such land to the Tribe and receive 
therefor an assignment to the same land or other land of equal value 
or he may receive a proportionate share in a unit of agricultural or 
other land.

Assignments made under this Section shall be known as “Ex

change” assignments.

Sec. 8. Exchange assignments may be used by the assignee or 
leased by him to Indian cooperative associations, to individual mem
bers of the tribe, or if no individual Indian or Indian cooperative 
association is able and willing to lease the land at a reasonable fee, 
such assignments may be leased to non-Indians in the same manner 
as allotted lands.

Sec. 9. Upon the death of a holder of any exchange assignment, 
the land shall be reassigned by the Tribal Council to his heirs or 
devisees, subject to the following conditions:

(a) Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who is 
not a member of the Walker River Paiute Tribe, except that a life 
assignment may be made to the surviving spouse or child of the 
holder of such assignment.

(b) Such lands may not be reassigned to any heir or devisee who 
already owns or holds more than an economic unit of land. Such 
economic unit of land shall be determined by the Tribal Council.

(c) Such land may not be subdivided into units too small for prac
tical use. The Tribal Council shall determine the practical subdivi
sions of the land in each case. If the land cannot be properly sub
divided, the Tribal Council may issue to each heir or devisee a pro
portionate share in other lands or other interests in land of equal 
value.

(d) If there are no eligible heirs or devisees of the decedent, the 
land shall be eligible for reassignment the same as other tribal lands.

7

Sec. 10. Improvements of any character made upon assigned land 
may be willed to and inherited by members of the Walker River 
Paiute Tribe. When improvements are not possible of fair divi
sion, the Tribal Council shall dispose of them under such regulations 
as it may provide for the benefit of such heirs. No permanent im
provements may be removed from any tribal or assigned land with
out the consent of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 11. No member of the Walker River Paiute Tribe may use 

or occupy tribal lands except under an assignment or lease.

Sec. 12. Unassigned land shall be managed by the Tribal Council 
for the benefit of the members of the entire Tribe in conformity with 
the rules and regulations prescribed by the Secretary of the Interior 
under Section 6 of the Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984).

Sec. 13. Tribal funds may be used, with the consent of the Secre
tary of the Interior, to acquire land for the Walker River Paiute 
Tribe.

Sec. 14. Applications for assignment of land shall be made in 
writing. Such applications shall be submitted to the Tribal Council 
at regular or special sessions. The application will be placed in the 
hands of a proper committee who will call the matter up for action 
at the next regular meeting of the Tribal Council. Any member of 
the Tribe may object in writing to a proposed assignment. In the 
event of objection, the Chairman of the Tribal Council shall set a 
date for a hearing, advising both the applicant and the objector. 
The action of the Council shall be final.

The Secretary of the Tribal Council shall furnish the Superin
tendent, or other officer in charge of the Agency, a complete record 
of all action taken by the Tribal Council on applications for assign
ment of land, and a complete record of assignments shall be kept in 
the Agency office and shall be open for inspection by members of 
the Tribe.

The Tribal Council shall draw up one or more forms for standard 
and exchange assignments, which shall be subject to the approval 
of the Secretary of the Interior.

Article IX—Amendments

This Constitution and By-Laws may be amended by a majority 
vote of the qualified voters of the Walker River Paiute Tribe voting 
at an election called for that purpose by the Secretary of the In
terior: Provided, That at least thirty (30) per cent of those entitled 
to vote shall vote in such election; but no amendment shall become 
effective until it shall have been approved by the Secretary of the 
Interior. It shall be the duty of the Secretary of the Interior to 
call an election on any proposed amendment upon receipt of a writ
ten resolution of the Tribal Council signed by at least a majority of 
the membership of the Tribal Council.
 
 

BY-LAWS OF THE WALKER RIVER PAIUTE TRIBE

 
 Article I—Duties of Officers

Section 1. The Chairman of the Tribal Council shall preside at all 
meetings of the Council. He shall also be the presiding officer at 
any General Council Meeting. He shall at all times have general 

8

supervision of the affairs of the Tribal Council and such matters as 
naturally pertain to the general welfare of the community. It shall 
be the duty of the Chairman to countersign all checks drawn by the 
Treasurer against funds of the organization.

Sec. 2. The Vice Chairman shall, in the absence of the Chairman, 
preside at all meetings of the Tribal Council and shall act in his 
stead in all matters pertaining to the office of Chairman.

Sec. 3. The Secretary shall keep an accurate record of all proceed
ings of the Tribal Council and furnish copies thereof to the Super
intendent and the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He shall attend 
to the keeping of the official records of the Tribal Council and shall 
be responsible for the prompt and efficient handling of all corre
spondence pertaining to the business of the Tribal Council and the 
Tribe. All official records of the tribal Secretary shall be open to 
inspection by the members of the Tribe at all times.

Sec. 4. The Treasurer shall be the custodian of all funds in pos
session of the Tribe from any source. He shall be under bond with 
a surety company of recognized standing in an amount to be deter
mined by the Tribal Council, such surety company and bond 
to be approved by the Commissioner of Indian Affairs. He shall 
keep an accurate record of all such funds and shall disburse the same 
in accordance with the vote of the Tribal Council and as designated 
by this Constitution and By-laws. The books of the Treasurer con
taining the financial status of the Tribe shall be open to audit and 
examination by the duly authorized officers of the Secretary of the 
Interior at all times.

The records of the Treasurer shall be open to inspection by mem

bers of the Tribal Council and its officers.

Sec. 5. The subordinate officers, boards, and committees of the 
Tribal Council shall perform such duties as the Tribal Council shall, 
by resolution, from time to time provide.

Article II—Qualifications of Office

Section 1. Any person elected to membership in the Tribal Coun
cil shall be not less than twenty-five (25) years of age, a member 
of the Walker River Paiute Tribe, and a bona fide resident of the 
territory of the Tribe for at least one (1) year prior to election.

Article III—Oath of Office

Each member of the Tribal Council and each officer or subordinate 
officer elected or appointed hereunder shall take an oath of office 
prior to assuming the duties thereof by which oath he shall pledge 
himself to support and defend the Constitution of the United States 
and this Constitution and By-laws.

The following form of oath of office shall be given: “I,_______ 
-------------------------- - do solemnly swear (or affirm) that I will 
support and defend the Constitution of the United States against all 
enemies; carry out faithfully and impartially the duties of my office 
to the best of my ability; and promote and protect the best interests 
of my people in accordance with this Constitution and By-laws.”

9

Article IV—Salaries

Section 1. Salaries of tribal officials shall not be paid from tribal 
funds in the Treasury of the United States nor changed in amount 
unless approved by the Tribe at an election.

Sec. 2. The members of the Tribal Council, boards, and commit
tees shall be paid for expenses incurred in the interest of the com
munity out of any available tribal funds when previously authorized 
by the Tribal Council.

Article V—Meetings

Section 1. Regular meetings of the Tribal Council shall be held 

monthly on the date fixed by the Council.

Sec. 2. Special meetings may be called by a written notice signed 
by the Chairman or a majority of the Tribal Council, and when so 
called, the Tribal Council shall have power to transact business as in 
the regular meetings.

Sec. 3. No business shall be transacted unless a quorum is present 

which shall consist of four (4) members of the Tribal Council.

Sec. 4. The following order of business is established for all 

meetings:

Call to order by Chairman.
Roll Call.
Reading the minutes of last meeting.
Unfinished business.
Reports.
New business.
Adjournment. 

Sec. 5. Ordinances.—All final decisions of the Tribal Council on 
matters of general and permanent interest to the members of the 
Tribe shall be embodied in ordinances. Such ordinances shall be 
collected and published from time to time for the information and 
education of the members of the Tribe.

Sec. 6. Resolutions.—All final decisions of the. Tribal Council on 
matters of temporary interest (such as action on the Reservation 
budget for a single year, or petitions to Congress or the Secretary 
of the Interior) or relating especially to particular individuals or 
officers (such as adoption of members and instructions for tribal 
employees) or rules of order for the Council shall be embodied in 
resolutions. Such resolutions shall be recorded in a special book 
which shall be open for inspection by the members of the Tribe.

Sec. 7. Procedure.—All questions of procedure (such as acceptance 
of committee reports or invitations to outsiders to speak) shall be 
decided by motion of the Tribal Council or by the ruling of the 
Chairman if no objection is heard. In all ordinances, resolutions, 
or motions the Tribal Council may act by majority vote, but all 
matters of importance shall be fully discussed and a reasonable 
attempt shall be made to secure unanimous agreement.

Sec. 8. Every resolution shall begin with the words: “Be it re
solved by the Tribal Council of the Walker River Paiute Tribe.” 
Every ordinance shall begin with the words: "Be it enacted by the 
Tribal Council of the Walker River Paiute Tribe.”

10

Article VI—Cooperation

The Tribal Council shall work in very close cooperation with the 
Indian Service and the various departments of the State of Nevada 
in matters of charity, education, recreation, social work, and public 
health, and in land assignments, with the Superintendent of the 
jurisdiction.

Article VII—Adoption op Constitution and By-Laws

This Constitution and By-laws, when ratified by a majority of 
the qualified voters of the Walker River Paiute Tribe, voting at a 
special election called for the purpose by the Secretary of the 
Interior, in which at least thirty (30) per cent of those entitled to 
vote shall vote, shall be submitted to the Secretary of the Interior, 
and if approved, shall be effective from the date of approval.

I, Charles West, acting Secretary of the Interior of the United 
States of America, by virtue of the authority granted me by the 
Act of June 18, 1934 (48 Stat. 984), as amended, do hereby approve 
the attached Constitution and Bv-laws of the Walker River Paiute 
Tribe. 

All rules and regulations heretofore promulgated by the Interior 
Department or by the Office of Indian Affairs, so far as they may 
be incompatible with any of the provisions of the said Constitution 
and By-laws are hereby declared inapplicable to these Indians.

All officers and employees of the Interior Department are ordered 

to abide by the provisions of the said Constitution and By-laws.

"

Approval recommended March 19, 1937.

John Collier, 

Commissioner of Indian Affairs.

Acting Secretary of the Interior. 

Charles West, 

[seal]

Washington, D. C., March 26,1037.
 
 

CERTIFICATION OF ADOPTION

 
 Pursuant to an order, approved November 13. 1936. by the Sec
retary of the Interior, the attached Constitution and By-laws was 
submitted for ratification to the Walker River Paiute Tribe of 
the Walker River Reservation in Nevada, and was on February 20, 
1937, duly passed by a vote of 123 for, and 18 against, in an election 
in which over 30 per cent of those entitled to vote cast their ballots, 
in accordance with section 16 of the Indian Reorganization Act of 
June 18, 1934, (48 Stat. 984), as amended by the Act of June 15, 
1935, (49 Stat. 378).

John Cleveland, 
Chairman, of Election Board.
Bert Summerfield, 
Secretary of Election Board.

Alida C. Bowler,

Superintendent in charge of the Reservation.
 
 

O

 
 